OF
STATES
OF
U.S. Department
oc
M
M
R
G
of Commerce
Learning Agenda
2022 - 2026
Innovation, Equity, and Resilience
Strengthening American Competitiveness in the 21st Century
Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan
Overview
What is a Learning Agenda?
is important, as well as a brief description of the approach to
developing the evidence or evaluation prescribed, and some
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018
additional details on the lead unit for the work and challenges
(Evidence Act) statutorily mandates Federal evidence-building
likely to be encountered in answering the question(s).
activities. The intention is to bring the best possible information
In many cases, the details provided on a project are notional.
and analysis to decision making. The Evidence Act's provisions
modify what is required in agency strategic plans. A new
This is a five-year Agenda and the questions and methodology
for the research will be refined when a project is initiated by
strategic plan is developed in the first year of the four-year
presidential cycle and is published in February of the second
the expert(s) engaged to do the work. Further, this plan will be
revisited annually to make updates and revisions. Events, White
year. Beginning in fiscal year (FY) 2022, a learning agenda
must now be published with the strategic plan. This new
House direction, and findings from the ongoing research may
require evidence/evaluation on different topics and priorities
companion document is a systematic plan for identifying and
may change.
addressing policy questions relevant to the programs, policies,
and regulations of the agency. It identifies short and long-term
How the Learning Agenda
strategic questions (i.e., questions about how, how well and
Was Developed
how should programs, policies, and regulations function) and
operational questions (i.e., questions that inform or assess
This Learning Agenda was developed as part of the process
agency's operations like human resources, grant-making,
of developing the Department Strategic Plan. A working group
and internal processes).
with representatives from every bureau and the Secretary's Office
of Policy and Strategic Planning (OPSP) was led by the Deputy
Learning Agendas address Administration priorities and
Performance Improvement Officer and the Evaluation Officer.
information needs, as well as long-standing challenges and
This team developed an initial outline of draft Department goals
future priorities that may emerge. The questions being asked
and strategic objectives. That outline was revised by the Office
drive the choice of research method(s), and all types of
of the Deputy Secretary with OPSP. Teams were created for each
evidence-program evaluation, performance measurement,
of the resulting strategic objectives, with an executive lead and
policy analysis, and foundational factfinding-are employed
members from the bureaus that will contribute to achieving the
to answer questions on the Learning Agenda.
objective. The teams were asked to collaborate with the bureau
Evaluation Leads to develop Learning Agenda questions that,
Document Structure
if answered, would significantly help the Department achieve
the strategic objective assigned to the team.
The organization of this Learning Agenda parallels the
organization of the Department of Commerce FY 2022-2026
The questions were reviewed by OPSP. Bureau Evaluations
Strategic Plan. Broad goal areas are followed by more specific
Leads were asked to coordinate completion of templates for
strategic objectives. For the respective strategic objectives, this
each of the questions OPSP approved. The templates required
Learning Agenda provides questions that will be researched
the information listed in Office of Management and Budget
to support achieving the strategic objective. For each of the
(OMB) Memorandum 19-23 Appendix B which provides
questions some background is provided on why the question
instructions for department Learning Agendas. The completed
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
templates were compiled into a draft Learning Agenda that
The listening session participants were informed of a Federal
was sent to OMB for review. This document is the result of that
Register Notice that was published on December 3, 2021,
process and final reviews and revisions from OPSP and the
inviting public comment on how the Department should engage
Office of the Deputy Secretary and the Office of the Secretary.
with communities and experts as the Learning Agenda is
executed. This broad outreach was continued in mid-December
Stakeholder Engagement
when Commerce hosted a public event called The Opportunity
Project Summit: Open Innovation for All. The event was
Stakeholder involvement improves the products and services
virtual, free, and open to the public. Program stakeholders
provided to the public and improved this Learning Agenda
were encouraged to participate. The summit focused on the
(see OMB 21-27). Internal stakeholders were involved in
Expand Opportunity and Discovery Through Data Goal area of
the development of Learning Agenda questions through the
the strategic plan and Learning Agenda, and created dialogue
tiered system of working groups and teams used to develop
with companies and universities, including minority-serving
the strategic plan. Staff who participated in working groups
institutions.
and teams consulted with subject matter experts in their
bureaus on strategies and Learning Agenda questions.
Going Forward
External stakeholders provided extensive input on priorities
The Administration and Department leadership emphasize
and preferences to the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and bureau
dialogue with stakeholders as essential to improving programs
leadership in meetings and site visits across the Nation. The
and service delivery. Therefore, this Learning Agenda includes
Economic Development Administration, the Minority Business
several projects that use qualitative research to gather
Development Agency, and the Census Bureau held virtual and
stakeholder input through surveys, interviews, workshops,
community based "listening sessions" to understand the needs
and focus groups. This work will create a foundation for
and issues relevant to different communities and demographics.
research on the impact of efforts to be responsive to the
community needs and service gaps that are identified.
Emphasis has been placed on providing opportunity for input
to historically underserved communities and populations. This
Upon publication of this Learning Agenda in 2022, ideas,
is consistent with Executive Order 13985: Advancing Racial
suggestions, and possible collaborations will be offered by
Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through
academics, activists, businesses, and nonprofits. It is the
the Federal Government. It is also central to the mission of
Department's intention to use this dialogue to improve
the Department of Commerce to create economic opportunity
the Learning Agenda and operations. Publishing this
for all Americans. To support diversity, equity, and inclusion
first Department of Commerce Learning Agenda is an
(DEI) in Department programming, the Department Evaluation
important step toward government that is more evidence
Officer and bureau Evaluations Leads participated in a listening
based and community centered.
session on questions in the Learning Agenda that pertain to
DEI. Senior staff of major organizations representing minority
communities, women, the disabled, and LGBT+ groups
participated. They offered exceptional insights on topics
that should be researched to improve service delivery.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Table of Contents and
List of Research Questions
GOAL 1: Drive U.S. Innovation and Global Competitiveness
6
Strategic Objective 1.1: Revitalize U.S. manufacturing and strengthen domestic supply chains
7
To what extent do Commerce's existing partnerships with other agencies, industry, communities,
nonprofits, and academia affect manufacturing, including the environmental sustainability of
manufacturing? What partnership factors are associated with strengthening manufacturing?
7
What Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) interventions most effectively increase
minority business enterprise (MBE) participation, innovation, and competitiveness in manufacturing?
What interventions increase MBEs' ability to participate, innovate, and compete in manufacturing?
8
Strategic Objective 1.2: Accelerate the development, commercialization, and deployment
of critical and emerging technologies
9
What types of partnerships or enhancements to service delivery would strengthen the impact
of measurement science research and standards development on U.S. industry in the fields
of artificial intelligence (AI), quantum science, advanced manufacturing, engineering biology,
and advanced communications?
9
Strategic Objective 1.3: Increase international cooperation and commerce
10
How effective are SelectUSA services in bringing foreign direct investment (FDI)
into communities and in supporting different industries?
10
Do U.S. exporters that have been assisted by the International Trade Administration's (ITA)
Global Markets (GM) program outperform U.S. exporters that have not been assisted by GM?
11
How much and what type of export assistance have been extended to underserved
communities? Does the data indicate any patterns in what approaches are most
successful in assisting these businesses to export?
11
Strategic Objective 1.4: Protect national security interests and enforce trade rules
12
Are the export controls that have been implemented on emerging technologies effective?
12
Is the export control system adaptable to the changing security environment, including the new threats?
13
Strategic Objective 1.5: Promote accessible, strong, and effective intellectual property rights
to advance innovation, creativity, and entrepreneurship
14
What regional economic conditions influence women's choices to seek and obtain
patent protection? What approaches can improve the accuracy of attributing gender
or other demographic identifiers needed to assess if underserved populations are
participating in the intellectual property (IP) (i.e., Patent) system?
14
How can effectiveness and efficiency of the patent examination process be improved?
15
Strategic Objective 1.6: Improve the Nation's cybersecurity and protect
Federal Government networks
16
What incentives or policies will facilitate industry's adoption of cybersecurity standards,
guidelines, and best practices?
16
What mechanisms are needed to improve collaboration and information sharing between
the Federal Government and private sector on cybersecurity issues?
17
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 1.7: Advance U.S. leadership in the global commercial space industry
18
What Department of Commerce actions and initiatives would most effectively promote
U.S. competitiveness in the commercial space industry?
18
What Department of Commerce actions and initiatives are needed to promote long-term
space safety and sustainability?
19
GOAL 2: Foster Inclusive Capitalism and Equitable Economic Growth
20
Strategic Objective 2.1: Drive equitable, resilient, place-based economic
development and job growth
21
What types of Economic Development Administration (EDA) funded activities, including those funded
by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and the American Rescue Plan
Act (ARP Act) are associated with the strongest long-term economic advances, particularly for
underserved communities and populations?
21
Given rapid changes in oceans due in part to climate change, how can the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) enhance fisheries management approaches to increase
the sustainability and economic competitiveness of U.S. seafood?
22
What techniques will raise awareness of the New Blue Economy? Which new statistics, once
developed, will most accurately measure and demonstrate the value of the New Blue Economy?
23
Strategic Objective 2.2: Build sustainable, employer-driven career pathways to meet employers'
need for talent and to connect Americans to quality jobs
24
What are the most effective and promising approaches to partnering with businesses
to identify skill gaps and train workers to fill them?
24
Strategic Objective 2.3: Advance entrepreneurship and high-growth small
and medium-sized enterprises
25
How effective are Department efforts to enable entrepreneurs to design and scale companies
around new technologies? How can these efforts be improved?
25
What are the most effective approaches to increase capital availability to minority businesses?
26
Did Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) projects, funded via the CARES Act, result in additional lending,
and did additional lending lead to positive outcomes for recipients?
27
Strategic Objective 2.4: Expand affordable, high-quality broadband to every American
28
How many U.S. residents have received broadband or improved or more affordable service
as a result of Federal broadband support programs and the Universal Service Fund Programs?
28
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
GOAL 3: Address the Climate Crisis Through Mitigation, Adaptation, and Resilience Efforts
30
Strategic Objective 3.1: Increase the impact of climate data and services for decisionmakers
through enhanced service delivery and improved weather, water, and climate forecasts
31
What new and sustained observations, data, and capabilities would be most beneficial
to support emergency managers and generally protect the economy and save lives?
31
What new tools, strategies, and techniques would most effectively improve communication
of NOAA's weather and climate forecasts to vulnerable populations?
32
How effectively is NOAA delivering Impact-Based Decision Support Services (IDSS) to public
safety officials and partners, especially in communities that are particularly vulnerable to
climate hazards? Do NOAA indicators ensure the information or support is accurate and
adequate for the level of decisions made by public safety officials and partners?
33
Strategic Objective 3.2: Strengthen coastal resilience and advance conservation and
restoration of lands and waters for current and future generations
34
What approaches have proven most effective in helping coastal communities and ecosystems prepare
for and recover from extreme weather events, climate hazards, and changing ocean conditions?
34
Do the models and tools that are currently available for communities to prepare for
coastal inundation at seasonal, annual, and multiyear timescales meet community needs?
What new models and tools should be developed to address unmet needs?
35
Strategic Objective 3.3: Accelerate development and deployment of clean technologies
36
What could be key sources of U.S. competitive advantage?
36
How can regional forums be an opportunity for clean technology standards?
36
Strategic Objective 3.4: Embed climate considerations across Department programs
37
What are the gaps in publicly available data, tools, and services that are needed for communities
to develop climate and environmental assessments required for EDA grant applications?
37
GOAL 4: Expand Opportunity and Discovery Through Data
38
-
Strategic Objective 4.1: Implement evidence-based decision making within
the Department of Commerce to increase program and policy impact
39
What challenges hinder the availability and usability of statistical, administrative,
and scientific data for evidence building? Which actions would have the highest
impact in overcoming these challenges?
39
What datasets are available/needed to track the impact of Department programs
on historically underserved communities/populations?
40
Strategic Objective 4.2: Modernize economic and demographic statistics to better
meet business, policymaker, and community needs
41
What refinements and new statistics would support more equitable management of the economy?
41
How reliable are early estimates of key economic indicators and what actions can improve reliability?
41
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 4.3: Improve Commerce data usability and advance ethical,
responsible, and equitable data practices
42
What barriers exist to collecting information from underserved communities?
42
What fundamental areas of research and standards, if targeted by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) and its stakeholders, will further develop the foundation for trustworthy Al?
43
What emerging technologies effectively enhance data sharing while preserving privacy and confidentiality?
44
What skills and training techniques are most effective in preparing the Commerce workforce
for current and emerging data challenges?
45
What barriers exist to using climate-related data by underserved and at-risk communities
and which, if addressed, would have the highest impact? What practices and techniques
would effectively expand environmental and climate data equity and usability?
46
GOAL 5: Provide 21st Century Service with 21st Century Capabilities
48
Strategic Objective 5.1: Effectively implement new Department of Commerce
authorities and investments
49
What grant disbursement processing procedures could be streamlined to reduce
bottlenecks and overall processing times?
49
How can data collection and analysis processes better inform whether a grant
recipient is progressing toward the success criteria established in the award?
49
Strategic Objective 5.2: Optimize workforce and diversity, equity, and inclusion practices
50
How effective are changes in the recruitment and hiring process in reducing the
cycle time for hiring and improving the quality of candidates on certification lists?
50
How could the Department's leadership development programs be more effective
in supporting succession planning?
51
Strategic Objective 5.3: Equitably deliver exceptional customer experience
52
What are the most significant barriers to providing business assistance to underserved
communities and populations? How can they be removed?
52
How can bureau customer relationship management (CRM) systems be integrated with other key
customer data and be used to track cycle time for service and the quality of customer experience?
53
What customer and human-centered design approaches should be used to routinely assess
and improve the design and navigation of Department websites?
54
Strategic Objective 5.4: Make Department facilities and operations more sustainable and efficient
55
What actions are needed to achieve electricity use free of carbon pollution by 2030?
55
What actions are needed to achieve net-zero emission buildings by 2045?
55
Strategic Objective 5.5: Modernize mission support processes and infrastructure
56
What systems can be established to quickly identify and correct process problems
that cause service delays outside of standards?
56
What mission support activities can be further streamlined to reduce the burden on mission
delivery staff time? How can processes be leaned without compromising value-add requirements?
56
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Goal 1
Drive U.S. Innovation
and Global
Competitiveness
oc 0 M M F R C E
b
6
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 1.1
Revitalize U.S. manufacturing and strengthen
domestic supply chains
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
factors that enhance effectiveness. Partnerships under review
To what extent do Commerce's existing partnerships
will include those within Manufacturing USA, the Hollngs
with other agencies, industry, communities, nonprofits, and
Manufacturing Extension Partnership program, technology
academia affect manufacturing, including the environmental
transfer programs (such as NIST on a Chip), workforce
sustainability of manufacturing? What partnership factors
development programs, and cybersecurity education.
are associated with strengthening manufacturing?
Timing of Activities
Lead Bureau/Unit
The work will begin in FY 2022 with focus groups and run
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
through FY 2026.
Background
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
The manufacturing sector is the sixth-largest employer
in the United States, representing 11 percent of gross
The approaches to answering this question will include both
domestic product (GDP) and contributing $2.3 trillion to
qualitative and quantitative methods. Qualitative methods
the economy. However, the COVID-19 crisis has underscored
include focus groups and interviews. The quantitative work
the risk of fragile supply chains and diminished domestic
will be carried out using in-house staff and a third-party
manufacturing. To respond to this challenge, Commerce
contractor who will study industry trends and the influence
will employ several strategies to strengthen domestic
of affiliations on the trends.
manufacturing and understand the effectiveness of current
approaches. NIST is the lead Department bureau for
Anticipated Agency-Specific
providing technical assistance to domestic manufacturers
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
and therefore, will lead the research.
Given the confounding variables, developing a causal
relationship between partnerships and manufacturing
Activities to Address Question(s)
sustainability and expansion will be challenging.
Foundational factfinding will provide information on the
nature of existing partnerships (i.e., what organizations
How Results Will Be Used
are partners? how do the partnerships work? etc.) and
Results will identify which partnerships may have positive
how these partnerships relate to domestic manufacturing
associations with manufacturing and the factors that led to
sustainability and expansion. Literature reviews, focus
positive outcomes. This information will be used to identify
groups with partners in the manufacturing sector, and
future partnerships and which manufacturing sectors may
analysis of existing data on trends in manufacturing will
be the most promising for partnerships.
add insight into the effectiveness of partnerships and the
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
7
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA)
This project is in the FY 2023 Evaluation Plan.
interventions most effectively increase minority business
enterprise (MBE) participation, innovation, and
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
competitiveness in manufacturing? What interventions
and Analytic Approaches
increase MBEs' ability to participate, innovate, and
The study will establish statistical benchmarks among firms
compete in manufacturing?
of similar characteristics. The assessment will compare
data on industry and firm-specific characteristics (e.g., the
Lead Bureau/Unit
value of capital assets, number of employees, firm age,
MBDA, Office of Policy Analysis and Development (OPAD)
financial condition, demographics, locations, size, export
destinations, and industry presence). Data from MBDA client
Background
records, the Small Business Administration, the International
Strengthening domestic manufacturing is central to the
Trade Administration, NIST, and the Federal Reserve will
Administration's domestic policy and is a Department
provide comparative analysis using a wider universe of
strategic objective; as is ensuring that the benefits
firms. MBDA will study the data for minority manufacturing
of Federal programs reach historically underserved
characteristics, types of assistance provided, international
communities (Executive Order 13985). A baseline is
market challenges, regional factors, and the level of
needed to establish their current level of activity in
specialization in industry sectors.
manufacturing and the characteristics of the firms, and
to assess progress in advancing manufacturing among
Anticipated Agency-Specific
underserved populations. As the sole Federal agency
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
dedicated to supporting minority businesses, MBDA
A challenge is the availability of information on race and
will lead this research.
ethnicity, which can be overcome by using imputation
algorithms. Sample-selection bias may require two-step
Activities to Address Question(s)
estimators or similar techniques.
MBDA is collaborating with the Census Bureau (Census)
on the research design. An Intergovernmental Personnel
How Results Will Be Used
agreement will be used to engage an academic expert
This research will help identify the operational needs of
in the work. Census data and administrative data will
minority manufacturers, to guide MBDA programs and
quantify the level and trends in minority and other
possibly overall Federal actions taken. The analysis will
underserved populations in manufacturing. The data
also inform additional research on minority manufacturers'
will also identify differences in the characteristics of
growth needs, risk factors, innovation, technology, workforce
firms in minority/non-minority groupings, support a
needs, and opportunities for targeted government assistance
dashboard and visualizations, as well as identify areas
leading to manufacturing success. Ultimately, the research
for further research.
will help provide more equitable access to manufacturing
opportunities.
8
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 1.2
Accelerate the development, commercialization, and
deployment of critical and emerging technologies
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Development Consortium, the "Digital NIST" pilot, and
What types of partnerships or enhancements to service
the development of the Department Standards Strategy.
delivery would strengthen the impact of measurement
The workshops are structured facilitated meetings of
science research and standards development on U.S.
stakeholders designed to reach and document consensus
industry in the fields of artificial intelligence (AI), quantum
on key aspects of the research question.
science, advanced manufacturing, engineering biology, and
advanced communications?
Timing of Activities
Work will continue in FY 2022 and end in FY 2023.
Lead Bureau/Unit
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Background
The research will be qualitative using focus groups
Science and technology are rapidly evolving, and new
and interviews.
capabilities are being integrated across the economy,
including manufacturing, transportation systems, critical
Anticipated Agency-Specific
infrastructure, and health care. While these innovations
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
contribute to the U.S. economy and quality of life, they
The advantages of approaches may differ across products,
have many associated interoperability, security, usability,
sectors, and firm size. This challenge will be addressed
performance, and resiliency challenges. Commerce will
using stakeholder engagement and by segmenting findings.
address these challenges through measurement science
and technology research, the creation of technical standards,
How Results Will Be Used
establishment of testbeds, and joint partnerships. NIST will
The work will be used to inform the modernization of
gather evidence on how to increase the effectiveness of
this work in dialogue with business owners and leaders.
NIST measurement service programs and initiate new
partnerships in critical and emerging technologies.
Activities to Address Question(s)
The question will be researched using workshops,
focus groups, and independent assessments of existing
partnerships and programs such as the Quantum Economic
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
9
Strategic Objective 1.3
Increase international cooperation and commerce
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How effective are SelectUSA services in bringing foreign
Research will be conducted in FY 2022-2023.
direct investment (FDI) into communities and in supporting
different industries?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Lead Bureau/Unit
Geocoded data will be segmented across industry and
Global Markets (GM) business unit of International Trade
socioeconomic groups. Spatial analysis will determine
Administration (ITA)
key trends.
Background
Anticipated Agency-Specific
SelectUSA identifies and assists U.S. communities with the
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
potential for attracting job supporting FDI to the United
Data quality on the types and levels of interventions may
States. Specifically, ITA's SelectUSA program provides data
be challenging. A review of missing data elements and
and research products, organizes investment promotion
outliers will address the problem. The lack of a standard
events, and conducts one-on-one client counseling in
definition for a disadvantaged community and lagged data
promising markets. These efforts are designed to demonstrate
publication at the county level are also challenges. ITA
U.S. competitiveness and value for high-impact international
developed a definition of an underserved community for
business investment. Information will be compiled and
FDI attraction as "a U.S. county or tribal area where the
analyzed on the effectiveness of past approaches and
unemployment rate is greater than the upper bound of one
alternatives in attracting FDI deals to identify ways to
standard deviation from the median of all U.S. counties.
increase the return on investment of these efforts.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
Information on the impact of past SelectUSA work will
Data on GM interventions and client verified outcomes
be used to design future interventions.
will be mapped with community demographics to
identify patterns.
10
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
and employment levels, and demographic information.
Do U.S. exporters that have been assisted by ITA's GM
The analysis will be done at the Census Bureau and findings
program outperform U.S. exporters that have not been
provided to ITA. This evaluation will be similar to an earlier
assisted by GM?
analysis done by the Census Bureau for ITA, Statistics on
ITA's GM program.
How much and what type of export assistance have
been extended to underserved communities? Does the
data indicate any patterns in what approaches are most
Timing of Activities
successful in assisting these businesses to export?
Activities scheduled for FY 2022-2023.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
GM unit in ITA
The research will use a quasi-experimental design with
statistical controls comparing ITA clients to non-users.
Background
Survey research will be used to assess the quality of
For robust growth in gross domestic product (GDP), the
technical assistance. Data sources will include two Census
United States must increase efforts to promote exports.
datasets, the Business Register, and the Longitudinal
Exporting provides clear economic benefits to U.S.
Foreign Trade Transactions Database.
businesses, workers, and communities. However, compared
to other industrialized nations, U.S. firms under export.
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Therefore, the Department is expanding efforts to help U.S.
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
firms export, including digital services. ITA will collaborate
with the Minority Business Development Agency to expand
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) must approve the use
its reach to more businesses, especially those that belong
of Census data that includes IRS data. A similar study was
to underserved communities. To support the effectiveness
done in 2015 and, the IRS approved the project.
of these efforts, ITA will be evaluating the impact of prior
export assistance work.
How Results Will Be Used
The findings will provide insight into variables that affect
Activities to Address Question(s)
export success, e.g., small versus large companies, part of
The work will be conducted in collaboration with the Census
an underserved community, industry. The analysis will also
Bureau (Census), Center for Economic Studies. The export
provide insight into which types of assistance have the most
levels, revenues, and job creation of firms assisted by GM
impact for businesses in different demographic groups.
will be compared to firms with similar demographics that
The information will be used to identify best practices
ITA has not assisted. ITA files on firms assisted and how,
and increase the economic impact of ITA services.
will be linked to Census data on firm exports, revenues
1 As defined by President Biden's Executive Order 13985: Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government.
Per Executive Order 13985, "'underserved communities' refers to populations sharing a particular characteristic, as well as geographic communities, that have
been systematically denied a full opportunity to participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life.", including minority-owned businesses; "persons who
live in rural areas" or rural U.S. businesses; "persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality" (such as women-owned businesses); and
members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons; and persons with disabilities.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
11
Strategic Objective 1.4
Protect national security interests and enforce trade rules
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
Are the export controls that have been implemented
BIS works continuously with its TACs, especially the
on emerging technologies effective?
Emerging Technology TAC, to gain insight into the
implemented controls' effectiveness on emerging
Lead Bureau/Unit
technologies and to develop improved strategies.
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS)
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
Through consultation with industry, academia, research
Qualitative approaches include consultation with advisory
institutions, technical advisory committees (TAC), other
committees and organizations and agencies that lead
U.S. Government agencies, and allied governments, BIS
technology development. Notices for public comment will
is increasing its efforts to identify emerging technologies
be published. Processes will be reviewed and re-engineered
essential to national security, and implement and enforce
based on expert advice on effectiveness.
appropriate export controls for these technologies. As
part of this effort, BIS will gather evidence on the impact
Anticipated Agency-Specific
of new controls on the development of technologies
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
in the United States and consider additional expertise
More staff capacity is needed to develop and execute
that may be needed to identify and regulate emerging
assessments effectively. BIS will collaborate with agencies
technologies effectively.
with technical expertise that are not traditionally involved
with export controls, and work with the traditional export
Activities to Address Question(s)
control agencies that support the National Security
Processes for communication to industry and research and
Council-led emerging technology "sprint groups" to
development (R&D) institutions and notices of inquiry will
vet inputs provided by the public and the TACs.
be reviewed. BIS will work with government agencies that
conduct or fund research relevant to emerging technologies
How Results Will Be Used
as well as TACs, identify proposed new controls for
Results will be used to improve methodologies to identify
public comment, and develop new controls through
and control emerging technologies, thereby enhancing
the multilateral export control regimes.
support of U.S. industry developing emerging technologies by
minimizing bureaucracy and protecting the national security.
12
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
Is the export control system adaptable to the changing
Data will be analyzed annually.
security environment, including the new threats?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Lead Bureau/Unit
and Analytic Approaches
BIS
The approach will include monitoring performance metrics;
review of data and literature on new products; and review of
Background
open source and classified information on potential threats,
U.S. technologies should not be misappropriated in ways
industry developments, and trends. Datasets on exports
that harm U.S. national security or foreign policy. Through
will be reviewed for patterns that suggest technologies of
the administration and enforcement of export controls and
concern are being exported to nations that pose a threat
to the United States.
participation in the Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States, the Department guards against threats,
including the unauthorized use of U.S. technology for
Anticipated Agency-Specific
purposes contrary to U.S. interests. BIS utilizes multiple
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
methods to enhance the administration of export controls.
The statistics readily available to measure adaptability are
This includes implementing changes from the multilateral
incomplete in the sense that they apply to the Department's
export control regimes in an expeditious manner and
defensive actions and not to the capabilities of the entities
gathering evidence to gain additional insight into the
involved in activities contrary to U.S. national security. BIS
Bureau's adaptability to new threats as they emerge.
will work with the intelligence community to maintain high
levels of awareness and knowledge of U.S. adversaries'
Activities to Address Question(s)
plans and activities.
BIS will track performance metrics, including its average
processing time for license applications and commodity
How Results Will Be Used
classification requests. This information will be used to
The results will be used to measure and increase the
develop evidence on adaptability. BIS will also request input
adaptability of Commerce's export control system.
from its TACs. Staff will research resources that identify
emerging technologies and activities of concern.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
13
Strategic Objective 1.5
Promote accessible, strong, and effective intellectual
property rights to advance innovation, creativity, and
entrepreneurship
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
and statistical analysis. Alternative attribution approaches
What regional economic conditions influence women's
will be compared. Model development will be used to
choices to seek and obtain patent protection? What
investigate location-specific factors influencing women's
approaches can improve the accuracy of attributing
participation in the patent system.
gender or other demographic identifiers needed to
assess if underserved populations are participating
Timing of Activities
in the intellectual property (IP) (i.e., Patent) system?
Data and model development are in progress. Workshop
will be in FY 2023.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Office of the Chief Economist, U.S. Patent and Trademark
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Office (USPTO)
and Analytic Approaches
Econometric and statistical tools and data mapped
Background
geographically will be employed in the analysis.
All Americans-regardless of race, gender, geography,
or economic conditions-should have the opportunity to
Anticipated Agency-Specific
innovate and reap the rewards from innovation through
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
entrepreneurship and commercialization. Patents protect
Factors influencing a decision to seek a patent may
inventors' right to financial rewards from their ideas.
be influenced by a complex array of factors, including
However, USPTO reports that in 2019 women made up
awareness of the system, socioeconomic factors, employment
only 17.3 percent of new entrants into the patent system,
agreements, and demographics of science, technology,
but women make up over half the population. More
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) graduates. Several
research and better data are needed to understand the
models will be run to identify factors that can be influenced
factors that influence women and minorities to invent
by public policy and outreach.
and seek patent protection.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
Results will inform outreach and educational programming
A workshop of methodology experts will be held to
on the patent system.
exhibit and critique approaches for the attribution of
demographic characteristics using administrative data
14
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How can effectiveness and efficiency of the patent
The ideation workshops took place in FY 2021; testing
examination process be improved?
lab set up will be in FY 2022; and implementation of
priority findings will be over four years.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Patents Organization of USPTO
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Background
Approaches will include tools and methods for Lean
Strong IP systems fuel investments in research and
Six-Sigma process improvement projects, including focus
innovation, spur new businesses, protect consumers from
groups, process mapping, data collection on cycle time and
counterfeit goods, and promote economic competitiveness.
error rate, and lab testing of alternative improvements.
To unleash the full potential of the U.S. economy and build
back better, the Department must make continued strides
Anticipated Agency-Specific
to ensure equitable and affordable access to the benefits
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
of IP protection. The Department must also resolve and
Revising labor agreements in line with process changes
deliver IP rights timely, while ensuring granted protections
will be a challenge. The solution will be building a
are clear and valid and curb abusive behaviors within the
compelling business case for new processes and standards.
IP system. Toward those ends, USPTO will review its process
for examining patent applications and identify actions
How Results Will Be Used
(including use of new technology) to streamline the process
Results will inform new processes that improve the
and make it easier for applicants to access and use.
timeliness and quality of patent examination practices.
Activities to Address Question(s)
An examiner ideation workshop will be used to identify
potential examination inefficiencies; empirical approaches
using cycle time data will be used to verify or refute
examiner hypotheses about patterns and causes of delay;
a lab will be set up to test and refine proposed process
improvements.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
15
Strategic Objective 1.6
Improve the Nation's cybersecurity and protect
Federal Government networks
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What incentives or policies will facilitate industry's adoption
Depending on funding levels, initiation of research will
of cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and best practices?
begin in FY 2022 or FY 2023.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Information Technology Lab, National Institute of Standards
and Analytic Approaches
and Technology (NIST)
The research will use qualitative methods, including
interviews, focus groups, and survey research.
Background
The Department will work with stakeholders worldwide
Anticipated Agency-Specific
to develop strong, trusted cybersecurity standards and
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
guidelines. Open processes will bring together industry,
The urgency of needed action presents a challenge.
government, and academia to develop workable approaches
The short-term solution is the deployment of information
to practical security. NIST will develop resources in various
on the implications of vulnerabilities.
formats to enhance their usability and accessibility, better
suit the needs of small and medium businesses, and meet
How Results Will Be Used
the varied needs of organizations in their unique contexts.
Results can inform changes to NIST cybersecurity programs
However, adopting cybersecurity practices has costs in time
and potential legislation to increase industry adoption and
and money; businesses, particularly in some sectors, operate
utilization of cybersecurity.
on narrow profits margins. Evidence is needed on what
government actions will support businesses in adopting
cybersecurity measures.
Activities to Address Question(s)
NIST will hold structured facilitated workshops with
representatives of different business sectors to explore how
government policies or incentives can increase the uptake
of cybersecurity practices. As options are developed, their
viability may be further explored using survey research.
16
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Workshops will discuss alternative approaches and
What mechanisms are needed to improve collaboration
innovations that may address the challenges. Discussions
and information sharing between the Federal Government
will also include approaches to keeping businesses informed
and private sector on cybersecurity issues?
on new developments in hacking and recommended
counteractions. Promising approaches will be tested
Lead Bureau/Unit
and assessed using survey research.
Information Technology Lab, NIST
Timing of Activities
NIST will convene workshops throughout FY 2022 with
Background
key stakeholders, including other agencies and partners.
The Department will work with private companies of all
sectors and sizes, as well as government and academia,
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
to develop usable and effective domestic and global
and Analytic Approaches
cybersecurity risk management practices. A new NIST effort,
known as the National Initiative for Improving Cybersecurity
Initially, the research will use qualitative methods, including
in Supply Chains (NIICS), will emphasize tools, technologies,
interviews and focus groups. Discussions and a literature
and guidance focused on the developers and providers
review will inform data gathering on the take-up of best
of technology. The initiative will build on lessons learned
practices and the barriers to using them.
from past cybersecurity risk management efforts and focus
on supply chains involving smaller organizations that face
Anticipated Agency-Specific
unique challenges. To support the success of this effort, NIST
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
will gather evidence on ways to better collaborate with
Often private sector entities are reluctant to share
the private sector on solving cybersecurity problems and
information with the Federal Government about security
communicate new developments and best practices.
issues for fear of highlighting weakness or opening
themselves up to liability. As a result, NIST will gather
Activities to Address Question(s)
anonymized data to encourage private sector participation.
A review of best practices from the National Cybersecurity
Center of Excellence (NCCoE) will inform further work.
How Results Will Be Used
NIST will hold structured facilitated workshops with
Results will inform steps the U.S. Government can take
representatives of different business sectors to explore
to enhance information sharing about cyber threats and
the challenges in cybersecurity for their business niche.
risks and countermeasures.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
17
Strategic Objective 1.7
Advance U.S. leadership in the global
commercial space industry
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What Department of Commerce actions and initiatives
Early FY 2022: Establish metrics and develop ideas.
would most effectively promote U.S. competitiveness in
the commercial space industry?
FY 2022-2024: Implement new initiatives.
Annually: Track performance.
Lead Bureau/Unit
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Office of Space Commerce
and Analytic Approaches
This effort will leverage the Bureau of Economic Analysis's
Background
annual publication of data on the Space Economy Satellite
The U.S. commercial space industry pioneers innovative
Account, results from the Bureau of Industry and Security's
technologies that transform people's daily lives, gather
ongoing space industrial base assessment, as well as
critical climate and weather data, and help secure the
the International Trade Administration's advocacy and
Nation. Increasingly, space-based assets are critical
export promotion data and initiatives. It will also align
components of the interconnected world and key to
with NOAA's advocacy, regulatory, and space situational
economic growth, national security, and competitiveness.
awareness (SSA) missions.
The Department has the tools and expertise to ensure
continued U.S. leadership in space, and the Office of
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Space Commerce is central to this effort.
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
Challenges will include projecting trends in an emerging
Activities to Address Question(s)
industry.
The Department will leverage a cross-bureau team of
space experts to collect data on the status and trends in the
How Results Will Be Used
industry and develop performance indicators for measuring
the competitiveness of the U.S. commercial space industry.
Results will be used to assess the Department's
This foundational information will help generate ideas
effectiveness in promoting the U.S. commercial space
for interventions and guide the implementation of new
industry's competitiveness, develop and support additional
initiatives. The metrics will be used to track performance
efforts in this area, and potentially discontinue ineffective
lines of effort.
over time and assess alternative strategies.
18
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
in international standards setting bodies. The Department
What Department of Commerce actions and initiatives
will continue stakeholder engagement and development
are needed to promote long-term space safety and
of cybersecurity frameworks for space assets. Established
sustainability?
criteria will assess the performance of these approaches
and monitored metrics will identify unmet needs and
Lead Bureau/Unit
performance gaps.
NOAA, Office of Space Commerce
Timing of Activities
Activities are ongoing and will continue through FY 2024.
Background
Tracking performance is an ongoing activity.
Space safety and sustainability are foundational to continued
commercial space activity and exploration. Promoting safe
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and sustainable space operations also has the potential to
and Analytic Approaches
increase investment in the U.S. space industry by mitigating
risk to space-based assets and human spaceflight. SSA is a
Regarding SSA, the establishment of key milestones and
key component of space safety and sustainability, particularly
performance against milestones. Collection of stakeholder
given the increase in space-based assets and orbital debris.
feedback through formal channels (e.g., requests for
Cybersecurity is also central to the protection of space-based
information), workshops, and relevant conferences and
assets and activities. Cybersecurity measures and policies
events. Participation in international standards setting
bodies and conversations.
are ubiquitous in the design, development, delivery, and
operation of components supporting U.S. space activities
and strong standards are required.
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
Activities to Address Question(s)
Budget uncertainties are challenging. Plans will depend
The Department will provide basic SSA services, contribute
on budget outcomes and be adjusted accordingly.
to relevant international standards, and develop space
cybersecurity frameworks. The Department is developing
How Results Will Be Used
an SSA data sharing platform called the Open-Architecture
Results will be used to support programmatic, funding, and
Data Repository (OADR) for civil and commercial use. The
organizational decisions on the next steps and capabilities
Department will continue to support the development of
for the Department to fulfill its role as the lead civil agency
standards and best practices to promote long-standing
for providing SSA services to the commercial space industry.
safe and responsible behavior through the participation
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
19
Strategic Goal 2
Foster Inclusive
Capitalism and
Equitable Economic
Growth
oc 0 M M F R C
20
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 2.1
Drive equitable, resilient, place-based economic
development and job growth
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
to measure changes. Stakeholders and program participants
What types of Economic Development Administration (EDA)
will also be engaged throughout the process. One approach
funded activities, including those funded by the Coronavirus
will be a grantee survey. Data before and after program
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and the
implementation will be compared to measure community
American Rescue Plan (ARP Act) are associated with the
progress. The inclusion of information on other government
strongest long-term economic advances, particularly for
interventions and investments in the analysis will provide
underserved communities and populations?
insight into the particular impact of EDA programming on
improving economic outcomes.
Lead Bureau/Unit
EDA
Timing of Activities
Data collection began in FY 2021 and will continue into
Background
FY 2026. EDA expects to identify research partners in
FY 2022, with corresponding research occurring from
Limited job opportunities, low labor force participation, and
FY 2022 and running through FY 2026.
poverty remain in communities in the United States, even
when national growth is strong. Additionally, many of these
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
communities were disproportionally impacted by COVID-19.
and Analytic Approaches
Supporting economic development in these areas will help
jumpstart economic recovery and build more economically
The approaches to answer this question will include a mix
resilient communities. To achieve this, Commerce will employ
of quantitative and qualitative analyses. Case studies will
several strategies, and research on the effectiveness of
inform the analysis. Potential data will include EDA award
alternatives will inform future decisions on approaches.
data, modeled demographic data from Census, and grantee
Part of EDA's mission is to prepare U.S. regions for growth
questionnaire responses. Additionally, EDA will conduct a
and success in the worldwide economy, and the Bureau is
literature review on related research and will collaborate
best positioned to lead this research.
with external researchers.
Activities to Address Question(s)
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Evaluations will be conducted to measure the effectiveness
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
of EDA programs on long-term economic development
During this process, several challenges are expected,
and reaching underserved communities. EDA is partnering
including work on modeled data, grantee non-response to
with the Census Bureau (Census) to better understand
questionnaires, and modernization of EDA's data systems
how to measure and collect information on underserved
during the Learning Agenda timeframe. EDA will engage with
communities and changes in local economies. EDA will
the Census Bureau on modeled data early on and incorporate
collect data prior to program implementation to establish a
questionnaires into more easily accessible platforms
baseline of economic indicators in regions and communities.
(i.e., Qualtrics) to overcome these challenges. Continued
Throughout program implementation, data will be tracked
engagement will also occur with Department stakeholders
(continued on next page)
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
21
Learning Agenda Question(s) (continued)
on the development of new grants management systems
How Results Will Be Used
to ensure they meet EDA's data needs. Isolating the effect of
Results will help inform approaches that are emphasized
EDA programming from that of other government programs is
and scaled. Findings will be integrated into future program
an expected methodological challenge that will be addressed
design for continued improvement.
primarily through collaboration with the academic community.
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
Given rapid changes in oceans due in part to climate
Development of capacity to account for climate change
change, how can the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
will extend over four years; technological advances
Administration (NOAA) enhance fisheries management
(e.g., uncrewed systems, 'Omics, artificial intelligence
approaches to increase the sustainability and economic
(AI), machine learning (ML)) are being developed.
competitiveness of U.S. seafood?
Survey expansion and integrating effects of climate
change into fisheries management strategies will also
Lead Bureau/Unit
extend past FY 2026.
NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
The seafood industry and fisheries are key drivers of
NOAA vessel days at sea will be increased to collect
economic growth and employment. However, rapid changes
relevant data. Additional data will be collected using
in oceans are significantly impacting marine ecosystems.
unmanned hardware and survey charters.
Through multiple initiatives, NOAA's NMFS promotes
productive and sustainable fisheries and builds healthy
Anticipated Agency-Specific
ecosystems. The rapid change in the environment requires
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
more and better data/evidence for decision making on
The underlying science of fish biological response to
trends and conditions.
climate change and ocean acidification is ongoing but
not yet robust. Continued science/data analysis and
Activities to Address Question(s)
integration will address this challenge.
NOAA will increase survey days at sea on chartered
fishing vessels and NOAA ships, and integrate advanced
How Results Will Be Used
ocean sampling and data processing technologies. These
Results will enable the eight U.S. Regional Fishery
technologies will include remote sensing, uncrewed
Management Councils to incorporate climate-related science
systems, analytical tools, and cloud-based platforms to
products into their highly collaborative, stakeholder-driven
increase the geographic extent and resolution of species
decision-making processes. NOAA will conduct necessary
distribution shifts. NOAA will also integrate more climate
environmental analyses and process management to fully
and environmental data to support fisheries management,
serve the fishermen and fishing-dependent communities
accounting for ecosystem changes.
who rely on the Nation's sustainable fishery resources.
22
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
marine dependent sectors to the National Economy, i.e., the
What techniques will raise awareness of the New Blue
Marine Economy Satellite Account (MESA). Data collection
Economy? Which new statistics, once developed, will
and statistical reporting is ongoing. Additionally, NOAA
most accurately measure and demonstrate the value
provides the Economics: National Ocean Watch (ENOW)
of the New Blue Economy?
dataset, which collects and reports state and county-level
data for six sectors that are dependent on the ocean
Lead Bureau/Unit
economy. Stakeholders will be consulted through interviews
and advisory committees on what additional data/statistics
NOAA, National Ocean Service (NOS) and Performance,
are needed to understand and grow the Blue Economy.
Risk and Social Science Office (PRSSO)
Timing of Activities
Background
MESA statistics to be released in 2022.
Expanding opportunity for more Americans is central
to the Department of Commerce's mission, and as the
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Nation continues to build back better, this mission is more
and Analytic Approaches
critical than ever. The Department will use established
programs and employ new public investments to promote
Data for the Ocean Enterprise report is an inventory of
placed-based growth in communities across the country.
businesses based on a representative sample survey.
NOAA has a leading role in implementing numerous
MESA and ENOW use the National Account Framework,
initiatives to support the growth of Blue Economy sectors
input-output (I/O) model, government (Census Bureau,
and coastal communities and will lead enabling research.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Coast Guard, Department
The New Blue Economy refers to the value of the ocean's
of Defense, Department of Energy) and private sector data.
data and information to address emerging societal
challenges. NOAA data and information is essential to
Anticipated Agency-Specific
"evidence-based decision making" locally and nationally.
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
Need to further develop the MESA Blue Technology sector
Activities to Address Question(s)
statistics. With stakeholder input, options will be explored
NOAA is conducting a market analysis on the Ocean
for investment in sector research and data collection.
Enterprise to raise visibility and awareness of the New
Blue Economy and better understand the linkages between
How Results Will Be Used
NOAA investments and the quality and quantity of ocean
The information will be used for policy analysis
observations. NOAA is also collaborating with the Bureau
nationally and locally. Further investments will be
of Economic Analysis to measure the contributions of the
influenced by findings.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
23
Strategic Objective 2.2
Build sustainable, employer-driven career pathways
to meet employers' need for talent and to connect
Americans to quality jobs
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What are the most effective and promising approaches to
Literature review began in FY 2021, and new material will
partnering with businesses to identify skill gaps and train
be incorporated throughout the Learning Agenda timeframe.
workers to fill them?
Evaluation will begin in the later half of the timeframe for
the FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan to allow time for program
Lead Bureau/Unit
implementation and data collection.
Economic Development Administration (EDA)
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
Global competitiveness and a healthy democracy require
A mix method approach will use qualitative and quantitative
that all Americans have an opportunity to participate in
data to answer this research question. Qualitative data will
the 21st century economy. Expanding opportunity for
include review of journal articles, publications, and reports
more Americans is central to the Department's mission,
as well as subject matter expert interviews. The impact
especially as the Nation continues to build back better.
evaluation will use quantitative data. EDA will explore
EDA is addressing this challenge through several programs
options to collect additional data on program activities
and the use of administrative data.
to support businesses and workers, notably skills training
systems and programs developed in collaboration
with businesses. To support maximizing the benefit of
Anticipated Agency-Specific
these efforts, EDA will monitor and study the relative
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
effectiveness of different approaches.
There may be limited research on related topics. There may
also be challenges around accessing and collecting relevant
Activities to Address Question(s)
data because of privacy considerations. EDA may partner
Foundational factfinding will provide information on the
with academics or another bureau (e.g., the Census Bureau)
nature and current approaches of existing partnerships
to overcome these challenges.
and how these partnerships help businesses identify and
fill skill gaps. Literature reviews and subject matter expert
How Results Will Be Used
interviews will provide insights into current evidence of
Results from research and evaluation activities will inform
effective partnerships and partnership approaches. This
selected approaches in partnering with businesses to improve
foundational information will inform the design of an
their ability to identify and fill skill gaps in their workforce.
impact evaluation using a quasi-experimental design.
These results will inform future program activities and
design to better meet business needs.
24
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 2.3
Advance entrepreneurship and high-growth
small and medium-sized enterprises
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How effective are Department efforts to enable
Project development will be in FY 2022. Partner selection
entrepreneurs to design and scale companies around
and data collection will be in FY 2023.
new technologies? How can these efforts be improved?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Lead Bureau/Unit
and Analytic Approaches
Economic Development Administration (EDA)
A mix method approach will use qualitative and quantitative
data to answer this research question. Qualitative data will
Background
include review of journal articles, publications, and reports.
The vitality of U.S. economic recovery and growth are driven
Quantitative analysis will use information reported to EDA
by innovations that spur entrepreneurship and strengthen
on project performance. The analysis may also include
domestic industries. The Department of Commerce plays
administrative and statistical data on employment.
an important role in fostering the growth of inclusive
entrepreneurial ecosystems that are aligned with their
Anticipated Agency-Specific
regional technology and innovation initiatives. EDA provides
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
multiple programs and resources to facilitate technology
Anticipated challenges include limitations in accessing
commercialization and entrepreneur support. As such,
relevant data and selecting a research partner with the
EDA is well positioned to lead this research.
proper experience in this area. Outreach to identify new
research partners with new and specific expertise will
Activities to Address Question(s)
address this challenge.
Foundational factfinding will assess the strengths and
weakness of existing programs and how they enable
How Results Will Be Used
entrepreneurs to use new technologies to design and scale
Results will inform what programs and activities are most
companies. Literature reviews and existing internal and
likely to support entrepreneurs in using new technologies
external data on project performance will provide further
to create and scale companies. The findings will be used
insight and evidence as to what programs have been
to upgrade the programming of EDA's Office of Innovation
effective for entrepreneurs. New data may be collected on
and Entrepreneurship.
program activities and metrics identified or developed to
gauge progress. Additionally, methodology and analysis
will be informed by a research partner or partners. EDA
will undergo a selection process to identify partners who
have expertise in this area.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
25
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What are the most effective approaches to increase
The Census Opportunity Project and analysis of results
capital availability to minority businesses?
are expected to run in FY 2022. In-depth research on
models and impact will run through FY 2023.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA),
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Office of Policy Analysis and Development (OPAD)
and Analytic Approaches
Approaches to answering this question will include both
Background
qualitative and quantitative data. Qualitative data will
The Department of Commerce plays an important role
include a review of academic literature, evaluations,
in fostering the growth of inclusive entrepreneurial
reports, and subject matter expert interviews as well as
ecosystems. Minority business enterprises (MBE) are critical
case studies. Quantitative data will include Census data
to the national and local economies, but access to capital
and administrative and financial data from other agencies
remains a significant barrier to their growth. MBDA leads
(i.e., CFPB, Federal Reserve, Community Development
Federal Government efforts to promote the growth and
Financial Institutions and Small Business Administration).
global competitiveness of MBEs. Through Business Centers,
Modeling and analysis may be conducted on the data to
programs, and initiatives, MBDA is addressing this problem
identify the factors and characteristics that are positively
of access to capital. Additionally, there will be ongoing
related to increased access to capital for MBEs.
research to assess the relative effectiveness of alternative
approaches to the problem.
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
Activities to Address Question(s)
Limited access to capital for MBEs is likely a result of many
Foundational factfinding will provide insight into the
factors within a system. It is a challenge for programs or
advantages and disadvantages of models, approaches, and
initiatives to correctly identify and mitigate these many
alternative financing for MBEs. Literature review, a meta-
influences. One potential solution is to use research
analysis of existing evidence, case studies, and interviews,
findings to inform and collaborate with the private sector.
will indicate what approaches have proven successful
This collaboration and increased awareness may lead to
in improving access. This review will include models and
programs that better target multiple challenges and biases.
approaches conducted by the government and financial
institutions (i.e., banks, fintech, and nonprofit entities).
How Results Will Be Used
MBDA will also use data from other agencies (e.g., Small
Results will be used to improve advocacy and awareness
Business Administration) to identify what factors are related
among private and public stakeholders. Findings will also
to improved access. Additionally, MBDA is collaborating
inform the development and design of programs to better
with the Census Opportunity Project to crowd source
address the needs of MBEs.
ideas and is exploring joint projects with the Consumer
Financial Protection Board (CFPB) and the Federal Reserve.
26
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
resulted, the characteristics of businesses assisted, the status
Did Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) projects, funded via
of businesses that received the loans (i.e., closed, open,
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
expanded), and how the loans were used (e.g., protective
Act (CARES Act), result in additional lending, and did
equipment, online presence). Outcome measures of loans will
additional lending lead to positive outcomes for recipients?
be developed to support further evaluation of the program.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Timing of Activities
Performance Research and National Technical Assistance
Awards and resulting loans will be ongoing through FY 2022.
Division of EDA
Data collection will be concurrent. Preliminary results relating
to early award will be available in FY 2023.
Background
The Department makes investments to enhance the capacity
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
of regions to advance local entrepreneurs and foster industry
and Analytic Approaches
innovation. One of the numerous Department programs
EDA will collect and analyze quantitative data of the
that supports innovation and entrepreneurship is EDA's RLF.
RLF to measure the RLF performance. Research may
The RLF allows grantees to provide capital to incubate or
also include qualitative data, such as case studies. The
accelerate new and growing businesses that can provide
evaluation will be conducted by a third-party contractor
high-quality jobs. The RLF program has also been used as
or academic collaborator.
a tool to assist businesses in continuing to operate and
recover from the impact of the COVID-19 quarantine. This
Anticipated Agency-Specific
research will provide information on the effectiveness of
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
the program in supporting business survival and recovery.
Capturing detailed data by RLF recipient organizations
on resulting loans will require new information technology
Activities to Address Question(s)
(IT) capabilities. To address this challenge EDA will roll out
As awards are provided, data will be collected and reviewed
a reporting portal for those entities to report information
on the RLF program, including the number of recipients,
consistently and securely.
geographic information on recipients, and disbursement
amounts. Data collection will also include information on
How Results Will Be Used
loans provided by specific RLF recipient organizations. This
Findings will be used to improve the performance of
data will be analyzed to determine the level of lending that
the RLF and similar programs.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
27
Strategic Objective 2.4
Expand affordable, high-quality broadband
to every American
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How many U.S. residents have received broadband or
ACCESS Broadband Report data collection and reporting will
improved or more affordable service as a result of Federal
be conducted annually. NTIA's Consolidated Appropriations
broadband support programs and the Universal Service
Act, 2021 grant program biannual awardee reporting (during
Fund Programs?
the awardee period of performance) is likely to start during
summer 2022 and continue through the end of period of
Lead Bureau/Unit
performance (two to five years post award). Programmatic
National Telecommunications and Information
results/metrics/data from new NTIA grant programs will lag
Administration (NTIA)
18 to 24 months from award given reality of timelines for
deployment of broadband infrastructure.
Background
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Broadband is an engine for opportunity in the modern
and Analytic Approaches
economy and a necessary foundation for inclusive growth.
Yet many Americans-especially those living in rural areas,
Analysis will use a mix method approach. This will
tribal reservations, and minority neighborhoods-do not
include comparative case studies of grant-funded projects
have access to quality, affordable broadband. The Department
and input-output analysis of the short and long-term
of Commerce will drive broadband expansion and adoption
economic impacts of Federal broadband funding based
across the Nation using strategies to support broadband
on recipient budgetary spending and programmatic
infrastructure, planning, digital inclusion, and technology.
outcomes, e.g., homes passed or improved with broadband
NTIA is leading the coordination of varied programs across
infrastructure. The economic impact analysis of areas with
Federal broadband infrastructure investment will focus on
the Federal Government to invest in advancing the Nation's
broadband capabilities. The Department will be assessing
changes in gross domestic product (GDP), unemployment
the output of these efforts.
rate, change in the number of jobs, change in the number
of small businesses, changes in household income, changes
in life expectancy, and changes in graduation rates. The
Activities to Address Question(s)
baseline development for homes passed and cost will
NTIA will collect and analyze data associated with the
leverage analytics of commercially available broadband
annual ACCESS Broadband Report (new per the Consolidated
subscription cost data to measure any national aggregate
Appropriations Act, 2021). Data will include cross-agency
changes in broadband costs (e.g., cost/Mbit) over time.
spending on Federal broadband support programs across
Analysis will also leverage the Federal Communications
the country. These data and administrative data will be used
Commission (FCC) (and other) benchmark data on the
to determine how investments have affected the number
number of locations/households without broadband
of U.S. residents connected and local economic conditions.
infrastructure to measure the gap that needs to be closed.
Additional activities will include reporting from new grant
programs on key broadband deployment and access metrics.
(continued on next page)
28
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s) (continued)
Broadband Specific Data Sources:
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
NTIA grant-funded recipient budget and programmatic
One potential challenge is getting standardized data from
reporting
other Federal agencies to align to metrics being analyzed.
NTIA grant-funded recipient project case studies
There is an inherent time lag in NTIA awardee reporting of
NTIA's National Broadband Availability Map
achieved outcomes (e.g., homes with available broadband
NTIA Internet Use Survey
infrastructure), given the time involved with deploying
broadband infrastructure and getting households connected.
Data collected from other Federal agencies to support
More accurate data on the gap of households/locations
the annual ACCESS Broadband Report
without access broadband will not be available from the
USA Spending Data from Federal agencies funding
FCC until summer 2022 at the earliest, and current FCC
broadband efforts
data undercounts the gap. Solutions will be explored as
Census Bureau: 2018 Computer and Internet Use
data is collected.
in the United States (released in 2021)
How Results Will Be Used
New FCC Broadband Location Maps (anticipated in
Summer 2022)
Results will be used to enumerate the effect of Federal
(and NTIA) funding on broadband capabilities across the
FCC: January 2021 Fourteenth Broadband Deployment
United States and measure the impact of Federal (and NTIA)
Report
funding in closing the gap of households/locations without
Pew Research: April 2021: Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet
broadband.
FCC: 2021 Urban Rate Survey Data
Broadband cost metrics, sources include BroadbandNow
datasets
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
29
Strategic Goal 3
Address the Climate
Crisis Through
Mitigation,
Adaptation, and
Resilience Efforts
oc O M M F R C E
30
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 3.1
Increase the impact of climate data and services for
decisionmakers through enhanced service delivery
and improved weather, water, and climate forecasts
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Users will be interviewed to identify information gaps and
What new and sustained observations, data, and capabilities
approaches to improving delivery of the information and
would be most beneficial to support emergency managers
investments in the observations and research activities that
and generally protect the economy and save lives?
would most effectively improve weather and climate models.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Timing of Activities
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
These activities will continue over the next five fiscal years
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR)
according to the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
Background
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Measuring and predicting climate change impacts are
fundamental to NOAA's mission. NOAA's world-class
NOAA will coordinate with other agencies to identify
observations of the ocean, atmosphere, and space provide
best practices and improve the data acquisition process.
timely, actionable data to make vital decisions that affect
NOAA will also deploy long-term planned observational
all sectors of the U.S. economy on a local and global scale.
infrastructure. Once observations are operational and
The next generation of climate prediction tools will rely
fed into model forecasts, improved accuracy will be
upon NOAA's ability to advance innovative observing
determined by statistical analysis and scientific review.
technologies such as satellites, artificial intelligence (AI),
Focus groups with decisionmakers will provide the
and uncrewed systems. They will increase computing power
gauge for determining if forecasts are actionable.
and cloud hosting to process unprecedented amounts of
environmental data and develop revolutionary coupled
Anticipated Agency-Specific
models to capture the complexity of the earth system. High
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
resolution models at variable timescales will be used to
Project management will be challenging but not beyond
provide timely and geographically precise forecasts that can
NOAA's capabilities based on past evolution of the
be targeted to the communities most in need. To stay ahead
forecasting system.
of the impending dangers climate change poses, NOAA
will increase investments in observational and research
How Results Will Be Used
infrastructure and capabilities, and translate weather and
Results will influence future decisions on investments
climate models into more accurate and actionable forecasts.
in observational and research infrastructure. Investments
that result in more accurate and actionable forecasts will
Activities to Address Question(s)
accelerate the transition of research on climate, space
NOAA will assess project performance year-on-year
weather, and coastal and ocean prediction into climate
reviewing the accuracy and completeness of data and user
science breakthroughs to protect life, property, and
ability to correctly interpret and act on the information.
the economy.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
31
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What new tools, strategies, and techniques would most
Research on format, timeframe, and audience for critical
effectively improve communication of NOAA's weather
communications is currently in progress. Review of data,
and climate forecasts to vulnerable populations?
observation, and tools needed will extend over four years.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
NOAA, National Weather Service (NWS)
and Analytic Approaches
The qualitative approach will include interviews with local
Background
officials in different roles and survey information on current
Climate and weather information is only as powerful as the
use of data and tools and information gaps. NOAA's science
actions it motivates and informs. To this end, the Department
community and data science community will collaborate
of Commerce provides decisionmakers across the private
on the development of new data and tools for delivering
information.
and public sectors with critical, actionable data to inform
their decisions. The increased frequency of extreme weather
requires forecasting improvements and enhancing service
Anticipated Agency-Specific
delivery, including extending the flood-mapping service to
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
the entire Nation. NOAA is undertaking the research needed
The principal challenge will be anticipating the unique needs
to provide more detailed and usable forecast information
of individual communities. Involving local weather forecast
and tailor communication on weather and climate
offices and conducting assessments of local user needs will
vulnerabilities to differing needs of local governments
address this challenge.
and communities.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
Results will influence what new analysis tools are
Activities will include focus groups, an assessment of
developed, what sustained observations and data will
patterns of previous damages and vulnerabilities, and
be provided, and the design of communication protocols.
documentation of end users' needs to identify new
observations, tools, datasets, and capabilities that
will enhance forecasts. Enhancements will be tested
to assess their effectiveness before being scaled to
additional locations and regions.
32
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How effectively is NOAA delivering Impact-Based Decision
Customer surveys and equity assessments began in
Support Services (IDSS) to public safety officials and partners,
FY 2021 and will continue over the next four years.
especially in communities that are particularly vulnerable to
climate hazards? Do NOAA indicators ensure the information
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
or support is accurate and adequate for the level of decisions
and Analytic Approaches
made by public safety officials and partners?
Several customer and partner surveys and assessments will
be conducted. They will assess fidelity to the IDSS system.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Process maps and guidance may be clarified or modified
NOAA, NWS
based on findings, and training modules created.
Background
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Ninety-eight (98) percent of all presidentially declared
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
disasters are related to weather, leading to approximately
Assessing IDSS consistency among partners and forecast
500 deaths per year and nearly $15 billion in damage.
offices is challenging given that localities have different
Emergency managers tell NOAA that NWS's IDSS has
structures for roles and responsibilities. Developing a
provided impact-based forecasts, supported their life-saving
methodology that specifically measures the impact to
work, and was communicated through trusted relationships.
vulnerable communities will require survey expertise
That quality of service should be available to all communities.
from the Census Bureau and survey testing in diverse
Therefore, NOAA is assessing consistency in the quality of
communities.
IDSS implementation.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
Feedback from partners via surveys and assessments
NOAA's NWS will conduct two surveys of customers, an
will be used to improve products and services.
Annual Core Partner survey that covers the full breadth
of NOAA's NWS services provided and an Episodic Core
Partner survey on specific weather, water, and climate
events. NOAA's NWS will conduct a follow-on to the
FY 2021 Service Equity Assessment to identify the necessary
people, technology, and expertise to reach historically
underserved and socially vulnerable communities better.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
33
Strategic Objective 3.2
Strengthen coastal resilience and advance
conservation and restoration of lands and
waters for current and future generations
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
review post-training evaluations and how the increased
What approaches have proven most effective in helping
skills and information have been applied.
coastal communities and ecosystems prepare for and
recover from extreme weather events, climate hazards,
Timing of Activities
and changing ocean conditions?
Infrastructure assessments are ongoing; database
enhancements are planned for FY 2022-2023.
Lead Bureau/Unit
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
National Ocean Service (NOS)
and Analytic Approaches
NOAA will assess the effectiveness of natural infrastructure
Background
approaches to make coastal communities more resilient
If current trends continue, $66 to $106 billion dollars of
to changing conditions. A natural infrastructure database
existing U.S. coastal property could be below sea level by
already exists but is being enhanced using a more robust
2050. Furthermore, the United States could see a 1 percent
suite of the current literature regarding effectiveness and
reduction in its gross domestic product (GDP) by 2100 due to
approaches, as well as approaches to finance resilience
coastal flooding. Given these projections, NOAA will address
activities. As new approaches are implemented, they will
the increasing demand for the science and services needed to
be tested for efficacy. Findings will be used to develop
enhance coastal resilience to climate change. The natural and
policy changes that are evidence based.
economic resilience of oceans and coasts will be advanced
using state-of-the-art risk-based tools and actionable
Anticipated Agency-Specific
information, strengthening on-the-ground partnerships,
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
and improving place-based conservation efforts. To deliver
A challenge will be understanding the needs of underserved
on these goals, NOAA must understand the effectiveness
communities and ensuring equitable access to NOAA's
of various approaches in supporting coastal resilience
NOS resources, products, and services. The challenge will
and preparedness for both extreme events and gradually
be addressed using surveys and direct engagement with
changing environmental conditions.
communities and organizations advocating for inclusion,
equity, and climate justice. Web analytics and vulnerability
Activities to Address Question(s)
indices will also be used.
Data on how and how often datasets and tools are used will
be reviewed to understand patterns on how communities
How Results Will Be Used
are accessing NOAA's NOS information. Surveys may be
Results will influence modifications to existing NOAA's
conducted to understand whether products are easily usable
NOS tools, development of new tools, and information that
and useful. Coastal program performance metrics and
is shared with state and local partners to justify investments
research will be reviewed to understand the effectiveness
in natural infrastructure or other resilience tools and policies.
and cost-benefit of resilience approaches. NOAA's NOS will
34
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
Do the models and tools that are currently available for
The implementation plan for the existing strategy will be
communities to prepare for coastal inundation at seasonal,
developed through FY 2022.
annual, and multiyear timescales meet community needs?
What new models and tools should be developed to address
Integration of research-to-operations will be ongoing
unmet needs?
for several years.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
NOAA, NOS
Interagency coordination will be required for planning,
Background
developing the models, and implementation. Established
methodologies for weather and climate modeling will be
If current trends continue, $66 to $106 billion dollars of
used and refined.
existing U.S. coastal property could be below sea level by
2050. Furthermore, the United States could see a 1 percent
Anticipated Agency-Specific
reduction in its GDP by 2100 due to coastal flooding. Given
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
these projections, NOAA will address the increasing demand
for the science and services needed to enhance coastal
A challenge will be establishing a process of continuous user
resilience to climate change. The natural and economic
engagement to guide tool development and improvement.
resilience of oceans and coasts will be advanced using
The challenge will be addressed by ensuring that the NOAA
state-of-the-art risk-based tools and actionable information,
Service Delivery Framework is central to user engagement
strengthening on-the-ground partnerships, and improving
design and is prioritized in funding discussions.
place-based conservation efforts. To understand and prepare
for the future, NOAA must identify what additional modeling
How Results Will Be Used
capabilities and tools will be needed for communities to
Results will improve the quality of data provided to
prepare for various scenarios of coastal inundation.
communities to support climate resilience and adaptation.
Activities to Address Question(s)
NOAA is establishing an implementation plan for its strategy
for advancing models and tools for coastal inundation at
climate timescales. As the strategy is implemented in phases,
new models and tools will be assessed for quality and
contribution.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
35
Strategic Objective 3.3
Accelerate development and deployment
of clean technologies
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Activities to Address Question(s)
What could be key sources of U.S. competitive
Market research and review of existing data will be
advantage?
conducted to project trends and identify factors that will
How can regional forums be an opportunity for
contribute to success/dominance in the market. Internal
clean technology standards?
targets will be identified that could help measure U.S. clean
tech client engagement to grow U.S. exports and inward FDI.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Timing of Activities
International Trade Administration (ITA),
Research will be conducted in FY 2022-2023.
Industry and Analysis Division
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
Promoting the development and deployment of clean
Modeling will be used to develop projections under
technologies will accelerate global decarbonization and
differing assumptions. Interviews will be conducted to
position the U.S. industry for future success in a net-zero
probe current manufacturing capacity. Research will
economy. The Department will advance the transition
identify emerging technology that could enhance the
to net-zero emissions by supporting clean technology
United States' competitive position.
industries necessary to achieve global climate targets and
U.S. competitiveness goals. In the near-term, the U.S. Clean
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Tech Export Competitiveness Strategy (CTECS) will seek to
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
increase global market access for U.S. clean tech exporters,
provide more targeted market intelligence to these
Anticipating technological breakthroughs and the timing
companies, and grow greenfield foreign direct investment
of commercialization of breakthroughs is difficult but
(FDI) in U.S. clean tech. In the medium-term, the CTECS
Federally-funded research and an incentive system may
will seek to position nascent and emerging U.S. clean tech
truncate the timeframe.
market segments to compete globally. Market research will
be needed to achieve both near and medium-term ends.
How Results Will Be Used
Results will be provided to U.S. manufacturers to support
manufacturing and commercialization strategies.
36
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 3.4
Embed climate considerations across
Department programs
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
associated with the development of climate assessments.
What are the gaps in publicly available data, tools, and
Development of descriptive statistics based on identified
services that are needed for communities to develop climate
challenges will point to (1) areas for targeted new datasets
and environmental assessments required for Economic
and tools, and (2) promotion or improved usability of
Development Administration (EDA) grant applications?
existing datasets and tools. Additional activities to address
highlighted challenges will be identified and pursued after
the factfinding phase.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Office of the Undersecretary for Economic Affairs (OUSEA)
Timing of Activities
with advisory support from EDA and National Oceanic and
The work will begin in FY 2022 with focus groups and will
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
address gaps as they are found.
Background
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
The Department is incorporating climate considerations,
and Analytic Approaches
including mitigation, adaptation, and resilience measures,
The approaches to answering this question will include both
into all relevant aspects of its policies and programs. In
qualitative and quantitative methods. On the qualitative
particular, climate considerations will be factored into the
side, focus groups and interviews will be conducted. On the
grant-making process. In the recent 2021 Department of
quantitative side, descriptive statistics will be developed
Commerce Climate Action Plan, Commerce committed to
based on the gaps that are identified in the focus groups.
"Further embed climate considerations into EDA's grant
making, through investment priorities, grant criteria,
application evaluation, and economic development
Anticipated Agency-Specific
planning." This means that EDA will require all grant
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
applicants that propose infrastructure projects to consider
A challenge will be ensuring that diverse underserved
impacts from climate change in project design. However,
communities are reached. To address this Commerce
not all communities have the same access to data and
will work with partners in cooperative institutes and
resources needed to develop these climate assessments.
extension programs to identify underserved and
This learning question seeks to identify what gaps exist
struggling communities and their specific data needs.
in publicly available data needed to develop these
assessments during the grant application process.
How Results Will Be Used
Results will first identify if gaps exist in the availability
Activities to Address Question(s)
and usability of data needed for climate assessments in the
Foundational factfinding will provide information on
grant application process. If gaps exist, new datasets, tools,
difficulties grant applicants have in obtaining the necessary
and services will be developed and made widely available to
information for climate assessments. Literature reviews, focus
ensure that all communities can develop climate assessments
groups with partners and state and local governments, and
needed to be eligible for EDA funding.
analysis of existing data will add insight into the challenges
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
37
Strategic Goal 4
Expand Opportunity
and Discovery
Through Data
oc 0 M M F R C E
38
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 4.1
Implement evidence-based decision making
within the Department of Commerce to increase
program and policy impact
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What challenges hinder the availability and usability of
Research will be conducted in FY 2022-2023. The
statistical, administrative, and scientific data for evidence
implementation schedule will depend on findings.
building? Which actions would have the highest impact
in overcoming these challenges?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Lead Bureau/Unit
The research will include foundational factfinding, analytics,
Office of the Chief Data Officer (OCDO), Evaluation Officer,
process review, data on page views and downloads, and
Commerce Data Governance Board (CDGB)
testing alternative technologies.
Background
Anticipated Agency-Specific
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
of 2018 (Evidence Act) and White House circulars and
Access problems may be caused by dataset format,
memoranda direct the Federal Government to make decisions
platform, and metadata differences. These differences may
using the best available evidence. The complex issues and
take significant time and resources to correct. There are legal
challenges facing the American people must be met with
constraints regarding access to data. The solution will be
facts, competence, and urgency. Doing so requires the timely
to establish priorities for improvements that provide better
use of information arrived at through rigorous analysis that
access (within legal limits) to the most useful data.
is governed by principles of scientific integrity and inclusion.
These challenges require that datasets be more readily
How Results Will Be Used
available and usable for research, analysis, and evaluation
Findings will provide easier access to and analysis of data,
to provide timely information to policymakers.
and will facilitate linking datasets. Ultimately, the work
will support data-based decision making.
Activities to Address Question(s)
Interviews will be conducted with internal experts on
analytics and evaluation, and current and potential users
of Department data. Staff will research enabling technology
and case studies. Novice users attempting to access data
will be observed to develop more intuitive web access.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
39
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What datasets are available/needed to track the impact
In FY 2021, the Census Bureau began collaborating with the
of Department programs on historically underserved
Economic Development Administration on data needs, and
communities/populations?
Census has created a website dedicated to "equity data."
A Federal Equity Data Committee has been convened.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Additional research focused on the Department of Commerce
evaluation needs will be conducted in FY 2022.
OCDO and the Evaluation Officer in collaboration
with the Census Bureau (Census)
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
The Evidence Act and White House circulars and memoranda
Approaches will include foundational factfinding and
direct the Federal Government to make decisions using
literature review, possible use of an algorithm that identifies
the best available evidence. Released on January 20, 2021,
datasets used in research (see Coleridge Initiative), and
Executive Order 13985: Advancing Racial Equity and
surveys of evaluation staff on data needs.
Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal
Government, directs Federal agencies to evaluate whether
Anticipated Agency-Specific
their policies produce racially inequitable results when
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
implemented, and make the necessary changes to ensure
Some useful data may not be consistently available for
underserved communities are properly supported. Data
all areas. The frequency of data updates may be a barrier
are needed for these assessments and to track if actions
to tracking economic recovery in small geographic areas.
to increase equity are achieving their objectives. Federal
Use of private sector generated data may help to address
datasets are available to measure community resilience to
the problem.
natural and economic disasters, but available data may not
provide the detail and currency needed to track conditions
How Results Will Be Used
in small, underserved geographies. Useful data may be
Results will be used to help monitor and support recovery
available at the state level, at academic institutions, or
in areas with economies that have been the most profoundly
with nonprofits. Research will be done to identify useful
affected by the COVID-19 quarantine.
existing data and to develop strategies for refining
available data to better meet assessment needs.
Activities to Address Question(s)
A literature search will be conducted and Census experts
and organizations representing underserved communities
will be consulted.
40
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 4.2
Modernize economic and demographic statistics
to better meet business, policymaker, and
community needs
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What refinements and new statistics would support
Refinements to income distribution statistics have been
more equitable management of the economy?
in progress and will continue through FY 2022-2023.
Work on increased accuracy of early releases of economic
How reliable are early estimates of key economic
indicators and what actions can improve reliability?
indicators is ongoing.
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Lead Bureau/Unit
and Analytic Approaches
Office of the Chief Economist,
The work is done through advanced statistical methodologies
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
and research and testing of data that is available through the
private sector.
Background
To navigate a dynamic economy, U.S. communities
Anticipated Agency-Specific
increasingly require detailed, timely, and user-friendly data
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
and statistics to support policy making and decision making.
There are challenges inherent in using data sources
Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated a need
developed for other purposes for statistics. Data must
for high-frequency and user-friendly economic indicators
be adjusted to fit national accounting principles and be
to enable decisionmakers to quickly assess the effects of
publicly available and regularly produced. The challenge
changing circumstances and sudden events. Therefore, the
is met through research and collaboration with the
Department is developing new economic indicators and
academic and statistical community.
approaches to increasing the accuracy of early releases
of existing indicators.
How Results Will Be Used
Results will be used to help manage the economy.
Activities to Address Question(s)
Research includes improving indicators of income distribution
and economic activity, and improved statistical techniques.
All new indicators and methods must be consistent with
national accounting principles and the Office of Management
and Budget Statistical Policy Directives.
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
41
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Strategic Objective 4.3
Improve Commerce data usability and advance
ethical, responsible, and equitable data practices
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What barriers exist to collecting information from
An approach has been developed and is under review
underserved communities?
by a Department Paperwork Reduction Act expert.
The approach will be submitted for public comment
Lead Bureau/Unit
in FY 2022 as a next step.
Office of Privacy and Open Government
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
A multibureau Paperwork Reduction Act Equity Workgroup
and Analytic Approaches
has been established.
In addition to survey instruments, other approaches to
identifying needed improvements will be used. They may
Background
include electronic social media, observation of user struggles
The American public and businesses rely on the Department
with data entry, focus groups, and in-person interviews. All
of Commerce as a trusted source of data. The timely delivery
improvements will be tested before they are scaled.
of quality, equitable, ethical, and secure data products and
services is necessary to sustain that trust. The Department
Anticipated Agency-Specific
will provide leadership in raising the standard for responsible
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
data practices. By first addressing equity in data collection,
A challenge will be developing and testing new approaches
Commerce will advance the ethical, responsible, and
to gathering information currently needed as new and
equitable practices in the first step of the data lifecycle.
expanded programming are designed. The solution will
be to request input on programming through several
Activities to Address Question(s)
media channels.
In collaboration with experts on the Federal paperwork
reduction requirements, approaches will be tested to increase
How Results Will Be Used
feedback from underserved communities. One alternative will
Approaches to gathering data will be refined. The information
be the development of a comprehensive question bank for all
gathered will be used to develop policies and programs that
bureaus to use to develop survey instruments. The standard
deliver resources and benefits more equitably. By addressing
questions, vetted by survey experts, would be used to collect,
equity in data collection, Commerce will advance the ethical,
analyze, and interpret information gathered to identify gaps
responsible, and equitable practices in the first step of the
in the equitable delivery of services and gain insight into the
data lifecycle.
accessibility of information to the underserved. Data will be
collected and reviewed to assess the quality of information
gathered using the questions to inform revisions.
42
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What fundamental areas of research and standards,
These activities are ongoing.
if targeted by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) and its stakeholders, will further develop
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
the foundation for trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI)?
and Analytic Approaches
Literature reviews and foundational factfinding, including
Lead Bureau/Unit
expert opinion, are used as a means of identifying risks
Information Technology Laboratory of NIST
of bias and why bias occurs. As possible standards are
developed to address bias, tests assess their effectiveness.
Background
The American public and businesses rely on the Department
Anticipated Agency-Specific
of Commerce as a trusted source of data. The timely delivery
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
of quality, equitable, ethical, and secure data products and
Challenges include long lead times to establish the
services is necessary to sustain that trust. The Department
necessary partnerships with industry who need solutions
provides leadership in raising the standard for responsible
in real time. Recruiting talent in areas of Al, mathematics,
data practices. As a leader in data practices, NIST has done
statistics, and computer science is challenging, but
and will continue extensive work on Al integrity. Trustworthy
will be addressed through NIST's extensive network
Al will increase public confidence in the Department and
of relationships in the data science community.
empower communities to use data to drive positive change.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
NIST will gather and share needs, strategies, roadmaps,
Standards development will include engagement with a
terminology, use cases, and best practices in support
community of experts through workshops, solicitation of
of reliable, robust, and trustworthy Al in government
comments, requests for information, and dissemination of
operations.
publications, datasets, and frameworks.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
43
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What emerging technologies effectively enhance data
Research is being conducted, pilot scoping is in progress, and
sharing while preserving privacy and confidentiality?
prototype(s) are to be built in accordance with resourcing.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Census Bureau (Census)
and Analytic Approaches
Tools and methods will include literature reviews, user
Background
interviews, landscape analysis (i.e., products and services
The Department of Commerce is referred to as "America's
available), technical prototyping using agile methodologies,
Data Agency" because it collects, stores, and analyzes
and policy analysis.
vital scientific data and data on the Nation's economy,
population, and environment. To continue to provide this
Anticipated Agency-Specific
leadership and make data more usable for research, efforts
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
are ongoing to modernize data ecosystems (i.e., data
Reducing the burden of data sharing and making Census
collection approach, data storage and configuration, and
data more accessible while protecting privacy is a formidable
tools for data linking and analytics). Through this process,
challenge. Emerging technologies may provide part of the
the Census Bureau will identify which emerging technologies
solution (e.g., Secure Multi-Party Computation).
effectively enhance data sharing while preserving privacy
and confidentiality.
How Results Will Be Used
Results will produce findings on potential emerging
Activities to Address Question(s)
technologies that can be incorporated in operations.
Conduct research on emerging technologies, landscape/
possibilities, and develop prototypes to test.
44
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Create capacity and access to Commerce-wide data
What skills and training techniques are most effective
skills training
in preparing the Commerce workforce for current and
Conduct data skills assessments to measure effect
emerging data challenges?
of initiatives
Survey/interview supervisors and learners on utility
Lead Bureau/Unit
of training and lessons learned
Commerce Data Governance Board (CDGB) Maturity
Research, share, and support good data management
Assessment and Data Skills (MADSkills) Working
and data stewardship practices.
Group-representatives from each bureau with a
volunteer chair from one bureau (currently International
Trade Administration (ITA)) and support from the Office
Timing of Activities
of the Chief Data Officer (OCDO) in the Office of the
Personas and associated skill needs have been developed;
Undersecretary for Economic Affairs (OUSEA)
the first training package pilot test took place October to
November FY 2022. Additional training options are being
Background
explored. Following selection of a training approach(s),
The Department of Commerce is referred to as "America's
skills assessments approaches will be piloted to determine
the best method. Research on best data management and
Data Agency" because it collects, stores, and analyzes
vital scientific data and data on the Nation's economy,
stewardship practices and data skill needs will be ongoing.
population, and environment. These functions are central
to the work of the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Analysis, NIST, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
and Analytic Approaches
Administration (NOAA). However, all Department bureaus
Methods and approaches will include foundational
manage and use datasets. Data analytics has become central
factfinding, focus groups (through working group and
to the work of all Department bureaus. To optimize data
Learning Officer Council), pilot projects, policy analysis,
management across all programs, Commerce and each of
process review, and evaluation of trainings.
its bureaus will implement sustainable data governance
and stewardship policies and practices to manage data
Anticipated Agency-Specific
more effectively from data collection to dissemination.
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
To support data-based decision making, data analytics
A challenge is that each bureau has its unique mission with
will be incorporated into more functions. This will require
unique skill sets required of its employees. It will be difficult
building a workforce that is highly data literate. To build
to identify a single training approach for data skills and
this workforce, Commerce must identify the skills needed
acumen for the entire Department. The solution is to identify
and the most effective training techniques to prepare the
a best fit to provide as an option at the Commerce level, but
workforce for current and emerging data challenges.
allow for bureau autonomy in deciding the end approach for
data skills and acumen training.
Activities to Address Question(s)
Develop Departmentwide personas (e.g., Data Analyst,
How Results Will Be Used
Data Scientist) linked to necessary sets of data skills
Results will help Commerce identify and deploy the best
Pilot data skills training options for all personas
training approaches to meet Commerce employee needs.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
45
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
the time between dataset identification to availability and
What barriers exist to using climate-related data by
utilization. Pilots and projects will explore best practices
underserved and at-risk communities and which, if
for data cataloguing (both within and external to NOAA),
addressed, would have the highest impact? What
data discovery and access, as well as ensuring all NOAA
practices and techniques would effectively expand
data is Al and machine learning (ML) ready.
environmental and climate data equity and usability?
Timing of Activities
Lead Bureau/Unit
These activities are ongoing, iterative, and agile over the
NOAA, Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
next five years. Feedback from early studies and pilots
with support from all NOAA Line Offices and National
are expected in FY 2022. Identification and assessment
Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) in NOAA's
of best data practices used across sectors and then
National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information
implementation of recommendations is long term.
Service (NESDIS).
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
The Department of Commerce aspires to improve data
The approach will include customer focus groups,
availability and usability for the American people. As the
process/practice analysis, analysis of pilot project
Nation's lead climate and statistical agency, Commerce
results, performance measurement of community
provides the authoritative climate science, demographic
utilization of climate related data, and surveys to
collect customer feedback.
data, and geospatial mapping services required to address
climate change and growing income inequality. To address
equity challenges and effectively deliver climate data to all
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Americans, Commerce will identify barriers for underserved
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
communities to use climate-related data and will develop
The challenge is identifying underserved and at-risk
techniques to address them.
communities. The solution is aligning this activity with
others in Commerce that are identifying underserved
Activities to Address Question(s)
and at-risk communities.
The approach to identifying barriers will include customer
focus groups, and outreach and engagement with local
How Results Will Be Used
data users and potential data users. Internal processes will
Results will influence recommendations for making
be reviewed to identify improvements that would reduce
data more usable and available for all communities.
46
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
This page left intentionally blank.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
47
Strategic Goal 5
Provide 21st Century
Service with
21st Century
Capabilities
oc 0 M M F R
/P.
n
48
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 5.1
Effectively implement new Department of Commerce
authorities and investments
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
program staff and grant recipients will provide further
What grant disbursement processing procedures could
insights into challenges in process efficiency and consistent
be streamlined to reduce bottlenecks and overall
measurement of project impact. A literature review and
processing times?
case studies will examine potential alternative approaches.
Additionally, an examination of existing bureau processes
How can data collection and analysis processes better
and performance metrics will identify which approaches
inform whether a grant recipient is progressing toward
have proven successful and provide opportunities to scale.
the success criteria established in the award?
Timing of Activities
Lead Bureau/Unit
The research will be conducted in FY 2022-2023.
Office of Acquisition Management (OAM), Commerce
Infrastructure Coordination Office
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Background
This analysis will include quantitative and qualitative
Managing funds with integrity and delivering results for
data. Quantitative data will include grant disbursement,
the American people is a fundamental responsibility of the
cycle time, and award data. Qualitative data will consist
Department. To achieve this, Commerce should process grant
of interviews with program staff and grant recipients.
funding efficiently and collect and assess program data to
A literature review and case studies will help identify
verify if programs are cost effective and making progress
alternative approaches. Additionally, a cost-benefit
toward desired outcomes. The Department will assess
analysis will examine the feasibility of implementing
processes and further integrate its systematic approach
and scaling new processes.
for performance management into all new and expanded
programs. These efforts will enable a more efficient grant
Anticipated Agency-Specific
disbursement process and effective use of program data.
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
OAM will lead research on best practices for streamlining
processing procedures. The Commerce Infrastructure
An anticipated challenge is identifying approaches that
Coordination Office will lead research on alternative
work well for different programs and bureaus. The solution
performance metrics, and data collection and analysis
is to establish frameworks and processes that are flexible
of grant recipient progress.
and can accommodate different program requirements.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
An analysis of current grant processes will include a
Results will establish a more streamlined grants
review of grant disbursement and award data to identify
management and data collection process and improved
inefficiencies and opportunities to reduce reporting burden
data for grant monitoring.
and improve technological capabilities. Interviews with
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
49
Strategic Objective 5.2
Optimize workforce and diversity, equity,
and inclusion practices
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How effective are changes in the recruitment and hiring
Changes will be implemented in FY 2022-2023,
process in reducing the cycle time for hiring and improving
and assessment will be conducted in FY 2024.
the quality of candidates on certification lists?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Lead Bureau/Unit
and Analytic Approaches
Enterprise Services, Office of Human Resources
This analysis will use quantitative human resource
Management (OHRM)
data, including the average number of days to hire, a
candidate quality index, and vacancy backlog. Approaches
Background
to answering the question will include customer
experience mapping and process management.
The competition to attract and retain top talent has become
fierce. Toward these ends, the Department is committed to
Anticipated Agency-Specific
improving the hiring process, reducing the time required
to recruit and hire highly qualified staff. Enterprise Services
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
provides recruitment and hiring services for the Department
Challenges include navigating complex compliance-focused
and manages the technology that supports the process.
hiring systems as well as standardizing systems across the
In collaboration with OHRM, they will analyze how process
Department. The solution is to develop and test innovations
improvements have affected service and candidate quality.
in collaboration with the Office of Personnel Management
to provide a clear benefit to the bureaus.
Activities to Address Question(s)
How Results Will Be Used
Analysis of cycle time, candidate quality, and vacancies
(number and duration) will provide baseline information on
Results will reduce cycle time, improve candidate quality,
the recruitment and hiring process. This analysis will identify
and reduce vacancy backlogs.
inefficiencies that cause hiring delays, negatively impact
candidate quality, and increase vacancy backlogs. As needed,
revision of metrics and dashboards will provide information
on process performance. Additionally, regular review of
performance metrics will inform continuous improvement
and maintain advances from previous process improvements.
50
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
How could the Department's leadership development
Research will begin in FY 2022.
programs be more effective in supporting succession
planning?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
Lead Bureau/Unit
A review will examine current approaches to administering
OHRM, Office of Civil Rights
development programs, including dissemination of
information on the programs, steps in the application
Background
protocols, selection criteria, and tracking the impact
The future of work requires new and evolving skills sets.
on career advancement and diversity and inclusion.
The Department will ensure employees can collaborate, build
knowledge, strengthen skills, and use evolving technologies
Anticipated Agency-Specific
and methods to excel in new mission areas and forms of
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
work. The Department will share and collaborate across
Anticipated challenges include navigation of the complex
bureau talent pools to broaden employees' experiences and
Federal hiring and promotion authorities, correctly identifying
knowledge base. Leadership development programs will
occupations that lack diversity, the availability of data on
enable bureaus to increase knowledge sharing and build
developmental programs, and linking data from multiple
a learning network. Empowering the workforce will allow
sources. The solution is to collaborate with staff with
Commerce to excel as its mission expands and evolves.
expertise on human resources (HR) and HR dataset options.
Activities to Address Question(s)
How Results Will Be Used
A cross-functional team will conduct an organizational
Results will enhance leadership development and
assessment to evaluate existing leadership development
succession planning.
and training programs. The team will also develop data on
the number of staff who participated in programs and their
demographics. Analysis will examine the career progression
of staff who have completed leadership programs and
identify challenges and opportunities for improvement
in current approaches.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
51
Strategic Objective 5.3
Equitably deliver exceptional customer experience
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
changes. The Department will share best practices across
What are the most significant barriers to providing business
bureaus, particularly from the Department's High Impact
assistance to underserved communities and populations?
Service Providers (HISP) (U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
How can they be removed?
and the Census Bureau) so all bureaus will benefit from their
extensive experience with service and information delivery.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Timing of Activities
Senior Advisor for Delivery and Chief Diversity Officer
in collaboration with the Performance Office
Research will begin in FY 2022 and continue into FY 2023.
Background
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
and Analytic Approaches
The Department provides many critical business services
to U.S.-based companies and entrepreneurs. These services
The approach will use qualitative methods, including
interviews and a literature review. Tools used will include
should be available to businesses across the spectrum of
size and sophistication. Therefore, the quality of customer
process mapping and data analysis. Additionally, data
experience should be central to service delivery, especially
collection on customers' key life experiences will provide
for businesses in underserved communities. The Department
information on how Federal services support or negatively
will undertake efforts focused on providing customers
impact those experiences. Performance measurement will
first-rate services and solutions that are easy to access,
monitor processes to sustain improved performance.
equitable, effective, and responsive for all.
Anticipated Agency-Specific
Activities to Address Question(s)
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
Processes that have the most impact on service access
A challenge is to achieve simplified processes while
will have priority for review. The Department will map
maintaining controls needed for good stewardship
current processes, collect data on error rates and the time
of resources. As a solution, the Department will
required for process steps, apparent bottlenecks, and
recommend rule changes when rules don't add value,
user satisfaction. The review will include interviews with
create standardization, and implement best practices
underserved populations and analysis to identify pain points.
that have been fully vetted by legal counsel and experts
A literature review will explore proven strategies to better
on internal controls.
meet customer needs. Analysis on customers' life experience
will provide further insights into customer needs. The Senior
How Results Will Be Used
Advisor for Delivery and Chief Diversity Officer, collaborating
Results will improve service to underserved communities
with the Performance Office, will track and collect data
and all communities.
throughout implementation to measure the effect of
52
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
and vendors. If CRM system integration is feasible, the
How can bureau customer relationship management (CRM)
Department will incrementally test and implement the
systems be integrated with other key customer data and
approach. Ideally, the integrated CRM system will ultimately
be used to track cycle time for service and the quality of
collect and track data continually to understand customer
customer experience?
experience and track response time to customer requests.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Timing of Activities
Commerce Data Governance Board (CDGB), Senior Advisory
Project design will be conducted in FY 2022; project research
for Delivery, and the Performance Office in collaboration
in FY 2023; and change execution in FY 2024.
with bureau staff
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Background
and Analytic Approaches
The Department provides services to communities
The review will include interviews and collaboration
and businesses through the Economic Development
with technical experts and users on CRM integration.
Administration, Minority Business Development Agency,
Consultations with mission and technical staff will also
International Trade Administration, Census Bureau, etc.
explore including standard customer satisfaction measures
However, with service tracked in CRM siloes, one bureau
and cycle time measures in CRMs, regardless of the
does not necessarily know what service another bureau
feasibility of system integration.
provided to an organization. As a result, the Office of
the Secretary may interact with an entity without full
Anticipated Agency-Specific
information of prior interactions with the Department
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
resulting in lost opportunities for orchestrating service
Challenges will include negotiating the inclusion of standard
and fully understanding customer needs. Integrating the
service quality measures in bureau CRMs and the time and
CRMs would address the problem and provide a system
expense associated with integrating systems. However, most,
to track the experience of individual customers when
but not all, bureau CRMs are hosted on the same application.
they interact with any bureau. CRMs could also help track
The solution is to create focus on the Administration's priority
the time lapse before a request for service is fulfilled and
of improved customer service and experience.
customer satisfaction ratings.
How Results Will Be Used
Activities to Address Question(s)
Results will be used for improved service through
The Department will explore the feasibility of integrating
service quality tracking and comprehensive records
CRMs with other agencies, private sector CRM uses,
on services provided.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
53
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Timing of Activities
What customer and human-centered design approaches
Project design and research will be conducted in
should be used to routinely assess and improve the
FY 2022-2023, and implementation will be ongoing.
design and navigation of Department websites?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Lead Bureau/Unit
and Analytic Approaches
Web Advisory Council, Performance Office
Assessments will use machine generated customer
experience data (e.g., search topics, click patterns)
Background
and customer survey data requesting observations
The Department is the front door for Federal business
on accessibility and experience with websites and
services. For many people, websites are the key to the
Department contact centers.
front door. To make that door easy to open, the quality
of customer web experience should be central to service
Anticipated Agency-Specific
delivery. The Department will establish overarching customer
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
experience standards and guidelines to assist bureaus
The collection and development of accurate customer
using web information and tools for planning, analysis,
service data is a challenge. The data is collected through
and decision making. This will ensure a customer-centric,
different channels and comprehensive analysis requires
structured approach.
centralized data collection and development.
Activities to Address Question(s)
How Results Will Be Used
A 360-degree assessment of customer website experiences
Improvements will lead to enhanced customer service
will identify potential areas of improvement for how
and service delivery.
services are delivered. Assessments will address current
and prospective customer experience with the support of
technology and human resources analytics. The assessments
will also collect and analyze customers' feedback, along
with insights from Department and public sources on
quality website design.
54
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
Strategic Objective 5.4
Make Department facilities and operations more
sustainable and efficient
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
collaboration with GSA and experts on heating, ventilation,
What actions are needed to achieve electricity use
and air conditioning (HVAC) and energy conservations
free of carbon pollution by 2030?
will assess options and inform action plans. Cost-benefit
analysis will help determine the feasibility of implementing
What actions are needed to achieve net-zero
alternatives. The Department will track metrics before and
emission buildings by 2045?
after conservation project implementations to measure
improvements.
Lead Bureau/Unit
Commerce Office of Facilities and Environmental
Timing of Activities
Quality (OFEQ)
Research will begin in FY 2022.
Background
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
The Department must reduce the carbon footprint of its
and Analytic Approaches
facilities and equipment to address the climate crisis.
Assessments will include quantitative and qualitative data.
Strategies include converting Department vehicles to electric
Quantitative data will include financial data, emission data,
vehicles, procuring sustainable products and services, and
levels of renewable and nonrenewable energy use, and
increasing energy and water efficiencies in facilities. OFEQ
engineering services. Qualitative data will include input from
provides facility support and infrastructure management,
building occupants. Approaches to answering the questions
and leads these activities in collaboration with the General
include foundational factfinding to create a baseline and
Services Administration (GSA) on facilities. A recent
identify inefficiencies, cost-benefit analysis to determine
Executive Order has raised the bar for Green Federal
feasible approaches, and performance measurement to
Operations. The order sets specific deadlines for agencies:
track improvements.
by 2030, net annual electricity use must be free of carbon
pollution. By 2035, agencies must stop purchasing emission
Anticipated Agency-Specific
vehicles. By 2045, all Federal buildings must be net-zero
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
emission buildings. The Department must conduct extensive
research and planning to meet these standards, particularly
Challenges include up-front expense for change and
for monument buildings (like the Commerce Herbert Clark
building renovation that is in progress as well as availability
Hoover Building) built in the 1930s.
of electric vehicles and other necessary equipment.
Assessment of solutions will follow the lead of GSA.
Activities to Address Question(s)
How Results Will Be Used
Foundational factfinding will assess the Department's
current state of water and energy consumption and the
Project improvements will reduce the Department's
projected effect of planned building renovations. Close
carbon footprint.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
55
Strategic Objective 5.5
Modernize mission support processes and infrastructure
Learning Agenda Question(s)
Priority Question(s) to Be Answered
Commerce. A literature review will explore the availability
What systems can be established to quickly identify
of technologies to enable greater efficiencies. The Department
and correct process problems that cause service
will establish priorities for improvement based on their
delays outside of standards?
potential impact on staff productivity and effectiveness.
What mission support activities can be further
streamlined to reduce the burden on mission delivery
Timing of Activities
staff time? How can processes be leaned without
One significant process is scheduled per fiscal year.
compromising value-add requirements?
Potential Data, Tools, Methods,
Lead Bureau/Unit
and Analytic Approaches
Performance Office, Evaluation Officer, Enterprise Risk Staff,
This analysis will include quantitative and qualitative data.
and Enterprise Services
Quantitative data will include employee ratings for internal
service quality, the number of re-engineered workflows,
and cycle time for service requests. Qualitative data will
Background
include interviews to assess existing processes and literature
Efficient internal processes and information technology (IT)
reviews. Approaches to answer these questions include
infrastructure enable the Department to provide essential
a cost-benefit analysis to determine feasibility as well
services, foster advancement, and decrease costs. Modern
as advantages and disadvantages of change. Dashboards
technology and "lean" reliable processes are essential
of performance metrics will monitor if service standards
to government performance and building public trust.
for cycle time and quality are maintained and will trigger
To increase the efficiency and accuracy of core processes,
corrective action when needed.
the Department will employ industry standard, productivity,
and process analysis tools. These productivity tools will
Anticipated Agency-Specific
automate repetitive tasks, reduce duplication of effort
Challenges and Proposed Solutions
and infrastructure, and standardize processes.
A challenge is to effectively engage staff who provide
a service in the improvement process. One solution is
Activities to Address Question(s)
to establish improvement teams and ensure these staff
Interviews of staff will identify pain points in service
are included.
delivery. Data collection will include the level of effort
and time required for high-volume tasks and service
How Results Will Be Used
needs. Benchmarking services at other agencies will
identify opportunities for improvement and best practices
Enhancements will improve the delivery of mission
and approaches that can accelerate improvement at
support services.
56
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
2022 - 2026 LEARNING AGENDA (Companion to the 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan)
OF
STATES OF
U.S. Department of Commerce
1401 Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20230
commerce.gov
in
f
