US Department of Commerce
Evidence/Evaluation Capacity Assessment
FY 22/26
What is a Capacity Assessment?
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (the Evidence Act),
Public Law 115-435, requires that agencies publish a Learning Agenda, with their
Strategic Plan, in the first year of the Presidential election cycle. The Learning
Agenda lists the evidence and evaluations the agency will develop to support
implementation of the Strategic Plan. A third document, the Capacity Assessment,
reports on the agency's resources to carry out the Learning Agenda.
The Capacity Assessment reviews and appraises the statistics, evaluation,
research, and analysis efforts of the agency. Assessment criteria include:
Coverage: in each bureau, what evidence and evaluation activities are taking
place and/or are planned? What departmental operations and activities are the
subject of this work?
Quality: are the data used of high quality with respect to utility, objectivity, and
integrity?
Methods: what are the methods being used for these activities, do these
methods incorporate the necessary level of rigor, and are those methods
appropriate for the questions to which they are being applied?
Effectiveness: are the activities meeting their intended outcomes, including
serving the needs of stakeholders? How are the findings of analyses being
disseminated?
Independence: to what extent are the activities being carried out free from bias
and inappropriate influence?
Department of Commerce Approach to the Capacity Assessment
The Department of Commerce (DOC) Capacity Assessment was conducted in June
of 2021, in order to inform DOC bureau budget submissions for FY 2023. The
assessment was led by the Department Evaluation Officer in collaboration with
the bureau Evaluation Leads. To complete the assessment, each bureau listed
evidence/evaluation projects in the FY 22 and FY 23 Annual Evaluation Plans and
1
anticipated in the five-year Department Learning Agenda. For each project a
rating was provided for the quality, rigor, effectiveness, and independence of the
research project, given the anticipated approach. The bureau Evaluation Leads
consulted with their internal stakeholders on ratings. Lastly, the template called
for a summary assessment of the bureau's coverage of topics that should be a
priority for evidence and evaluation.
The completed templates and interviews with the bureau Evaluation Leads on
capacity are summarized in the following sections of this document. The sections
correspond to the questions in OMB A-11, Part 6, section 290.13.
Summary of Findings
Programs and Initiatives being evaluated and analyzed -
The DOC Learning Agenda for FY 22/26 and the Department Annual Evaluation
Plans for FY 22 and FY 23 list all the significant evidence development and
evaluations currently planned. The Learning Agenda will be revisited/refreshed
each year and may change because new issues and/or evidence needs have
emerged. The research projects listed engage in "evidence building," both
through the evaluation of a project or program, as well ae through foundational
fact-finding needed to effectively administer a program or to create baseline data
essential to a future evaluation.
Impact, output, process, or formative evaluations are planned on the following
topics:
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) - Indicators of Income Distribution
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) - Effectiveness and Agility of Export Controls
on New Technologies
Census Bureau - 2020 Decennial
Economic Development Administration (EDA) - CARES and American Rescue Plan
Programming; Economic Development Revolving Loan Program; Scaling New
Technology
2
International Trade Administration (ITA) - SelectUSA Promotion of Foreign Direct
Investment; Export Assistance for Businesses
Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) - Interventions to Promote
Minority Business Participation in Manufacturing
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) - Commercialization of New
Technologies; Program Review by the National Academy of Science, Engineering
and Medicine; Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) - Process Fidelity of
NOAA's Impact-Based Decision Support Services; Equitable Climate Service
Delivery; Assessments of Planned Offshore Energy Activities
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) -
Expansion of Broadband Access
Office of the Chief Financial Officer and Assistant Secretary for Administration
(CFO/ASA) - Leadership Development Programming; Processes for Recruitment
and Hiring
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) - Customer Experience;
Minority and Women Participation in Intellectual Property Protection
Extent to which the needs of various divisions (e.g., bureaus, offices, programs)
are supported? -
Many research projects will be carried out with the help of contractors and
academics. A resource guide to instruments and programs that can be used to
engage academics in Department research is being created.
Collaboration across the DOC will also support evaluation and evidence-building
activities. The Census Bureau's Center for Economic Studies is supporting
evidence/evaluation efforts of other bureaus, and Census is collaborating with the
Economic Development Administration (EDA) on new economic indicators and
data tools that will be useful in both project selection and monitoring. Census has
3
provided technical assistance in support of International Trade Administration
(ITA) survey research. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) is collaborating with the General Services Administration's (GSA) Office of
Evaluation Sciences on research supporting improved communication of weather
and climate information to underserved communities.
Extent to which activities address balance among learning, management, and
oversight? -
The Department Learning Agenda includes "foundational fact finding," formative
evaluations, output evaluations, impact evaluations, and process
evaluation/improvement projects. Projects are prescribed for all bureaus and in
support of all the Strategic Objectives in the FY 22/26 Strategic Plan. Most
initiatives will be tools for learning, management, and oversight. Several projects
use qualitative research approaches (interviews, focus groups, surveys) to
develop evidence on stakeholder needs and service gaps. This information will
inform further research and management decisions on policies and priorities.
The Department's quantitative projects will leverage the Department's
administrative and statistical data, including but not limited to data from
Customer Relationship Management systems, grants management systems, the
Census Business Register, and the Longitudinal Foreign Trade Transaction
database, to learn what interventions work under what circumstances. The
Census Opportunity Atlas, Community Resilience Estimates, and Small Area
Income and Poverty Estimates will support the identification of communities and
populations that have been historically underserved. The Department will hold
itself accountable for achieving equity in program benefits.
The creation and refinement of rigorous evidence, relied upon by millions of
people, is a core function of several of DOC's bureaus including the Census
Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), and NOAA. These agencies are in the "evidence
business." Census and BEA create data sets and statistics that are fundamental to
economic and demographic research and monitoring change (i.e., learning,
management, and oversight). NOAA and NIST create data sets and conduct
4
research essential to economic progress, public safety and monitoring the effects
of their conservation work (i.e., learning, management, and oversight).
Learning is also supported by the Census Bureau's "The Opportunity Project" which
uses the wisdom of the crowd to solve problems. The Project asks the American
community to provide their proposed solutions to pressing problems. For example,
in Fall 2021, technology development sprints brought together 10+ organizations
to improve minority businesses' access to capital and tackle the climate crisis
through climate-smart communities. Participants included large companies,
startups, minority owned businesses, city governments, and national advocacy
organizations.
Most of the process evaluation/improvement work is prescribed under Goal Area
5 of the Strategic Plan, which pertains to customer service and mission support.
"Lean" process improvement methods will be applied to improve service for both
internal and external customers and implement Executive Order 13571 on
Transforming the Federal Customer Experience.
Extent to which the agency uses appropriate methods? -
Data quality is a preeminent value of the Department's scientific and statistical
bureaus. Maintaining and improving data quality is supported by regimens that
are assessed and upgraded as new methods and technology emerge. In support
of the Evidence Act, data sets are being catalogued for the "Commerce Data Hub"
that will facilitate use of this high-quality data by public and private organizations
and individuals.
Census and BEA adhere to the Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical
Agency and OMB Standards and Guidelines for Statistical Surveys and contribute
to the content and evolution of this guidance. The bureaus refine and evolve data
collections and statistics to meet the needs of data analysts and decision makers
as the economy changes and new technology emerges. During the pandemic,
Census created the weekly Household Pulse Survey and the Small Business Pulse
Survey to monitor the effects of COVID 19 and the resulting quarantine. Census
and BEA are investigating ways to provide more geographically granular and
frequent data on the economy to help track recovery and the effectiveness of
5
recovery programming. BEA is also refining indicators of income distribution.
Advisory committees, that include preeminent academics and business leaders,
guide the development of new and improved data sets and statistics.
NOAA and NIST are responsible for research that is essential to economic vitality
(e.g., new materials, information technology) and reducing and mitigating climate
change (e.g., ocean levels and extreme weather trends). They invent and test
new ways to collect data and methodologies for interpreting the data. Their
science is published in peer-reviewed journals and is available to the general
public on their websites.
The Census Bureau consults on survey research for other bureaus and their
Center for Economic Studies (CES) is available to advise on methodologies for
building evidence and conducting evaluations. The methodologies for some of
the research, presented in the Learning Agenda, is notional. CES and/or qualified
academics and contractors will be engaged to conduct the work or collaborate on
it. These experts will refine methodologies. Further, the Office of the Under
Secretary for Economic Affairs, which includes the Department Chief Economist,
Evaluation Officer, Chief Data Officer, and Statistical Official, is establishing a
system of internal peer review to bring additional expertise to evaluation
methods. The General Services Administration's Office of Evaluation Sciences has
provided expert input on statistical methods and will continue to be consulted as
the Learning Agenda is executed.
Finally, the Department Administrative Order (DAO) 216-21 on Program Evaluation
sets standards for the relevance, rigor, independence, ethics, and transparency of
evaluations and has reporting requirements to monitor implementation of annual
Evaluation Plans and the standards.
Extent to which capacity is present for planning and implementing evaluation,
disseminating findings, incorporating employee views, and using research and
analysis in day-to-day operations? -
6
Bureaus fall along a spectrum of experience with, and staff dedicated to, employing
evidence/evaluation research. Planning and transitioning research to operations is
part of well-established protocols of the Department's larger bureaus and
statistical organizations (NIST, NOAA, Census, BEA, US Patent and Trademark
Office). The Economic Development Administration and the Minority Business
Development Agency have had research as part of their portfolios for decades but
have added capacity to meet the evidence/evaluation needs of their recently
expanded programming. MBDA's Office of Policy Analysis and Development
(OPAD) will lead the agency's evidence and evaluation efforts and assist other
Federal agencies with data-based approaches to increasing program benefits to
historically underserved communities.
ITA has considerable capacity for research on industry trends, and their Global
Markets directorate has data and evaluation expertise. In recent years, ITA has
collaborated with Census's Center for Economic Studies on an evaluation with a
quasi-experimental design that leverages ITA's Customer Relations Management
database and Census statistical data. The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) and
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) will rely
on contract support for evaluation and have great evidence building capabilities in
their disciplines.
The Evaluation Officer and Chief Data Officer are housed in the Office of the Under
Secretary for Economic Affairs (OUSEA). They collaborate together and with the
Department's Statistical Official (a function that rotates between the Directors of
BEA and the Census Bureau every two years). Currently, they are supported
primarily by contractors and details and through collaboration with bureaus and
staff from other offices.
The Department is making investments in OUSEA to increase the capacity to
improve data accessibility, evidence/evaluation planning, and integrate findings
into operations. The increased capabilities will provide methodological expertise,
training programs, an internal peer review program, and support "data analysis
on demand" for the Office of the Secretary.
7
The Evaluation Officer and staff are also responsible for administering DAO 216-
21 on Program Evaluation. This Department Administrative Order requires that
bureaus report research findings to the Deputy Secretary and explain how the
findings will be used in operations. The Evaluation Officer will report to the
Deputy Secretary twice a year on the status of the Annual Evaluation Plan and the
Learning Agenda.
Dissemination and Deployment of Evidence and Evaluations
Stakeholders will be consulted when research methodologies are designed and at
significant milestones during the study process. Drafts and preliminary findings
will be shared with internal stakeholders and staff of collaborating organizations.
When projects are complete, the reports will be posted on the public-facing
websites of the relevant bureaus. Care will be taken to ensure that legal
restrictions on access to the information, e.g., for security or privacy reasons, are
adhered to.
Significant evidence/evaluation findings are often presented at conferences and
workshops to the appropriate communities of practices. NOAA, NIST, Census, and
BEA research is often published in peer-reviewed journals as an objective
measure of quality and to make the results more accessible.
Stakeholder engagement in the research process will primarily be the
responsibility of the bureau/office sponsoring the development of the
evidence/evaluation. However, the Evaluation Officer, MBDA, the Office of
Business Liaison, the Office of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships, and
the Office of Public Affairs will support stakeholder engagement through their
networks of organizations and communities. The Evaluation Officer, the Office
of
Business Liaison, MBDA and the Office of the Secretary recently sponsored a
"listening session" on the Department's Learning Agenda and invited comments
through a Dec. 3 notice in the Federal Register.
Conclusion
The Department of Commerce is a national resource for evidence on
demographics, the economy, climate, weather, materials science, and other vital
scientific research. The Department is making critical investments to promote
8
synergy from the deep and varied evidence and evaluation expertise of the
bureaus and to get maximum value from Commerce's world-class data.
9
