Department of Homeland Security
DHS Directives System
Directive Number: 069-03
Revision Number: 00
Issue Date: 02/11/2021
Program, Policy, and Organizational Evaluations
I. Purpose
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is committed to ensuring a strong
culture of evaluation, evidence building, and organizational learning. A robust and
coordinated evaluation function is essential to the Department's capacity to build
rigorous evidence for better decision making. This Directive provides the overall
policy, responsibilities, and principles for the conduct of evaluation within DHS.
II. Scope
This Directive is applicable throughout DHS with the exception of the Office of the
Inspector General.
III.
Authorities
A.
Public Law 115-435, 132 Stat.5529, "Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018" ('Evidence Act')
B.
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-19-23 "Phase
1 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance"
C.
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-20-12 "Phase
4 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018: Program Evaluation Standards and Practices"
D.
Public Law 114-264, 130 Stat. 1371, "Program Management Improvement
Accountability Act of 2016 (PMIAA)"
E.
Public Law 103-62, 107 Stat. 285, "Government Performance and Results
Act of 1993 (GPRA)"
F.
Public Law 111-352, 124 Stat. 3866, "Government Performance and
Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA)"
G.
DHS Delegation 00007, "Delegation to the Deputy Under Secretary for
Management"
1
H.
DHS Designation 00-01001, "Designation to the Director of Program
Analysis and Evaluation" as the Chief Evaluation Officer.
IV. Responsibilities
A.
DHS Evaluation Officer (EO) reports to the Chief Financial Officer and
has authority and responsibility for providing leadership over the Department's
evaluation activities. The EO:
1.
Establishes and oversees Department-wide implementation of this
Evaluation Policy.
2.
Coordinates and engages with Department stakeholders in
carrying out the responsibilities assigned to the EO in the Evidence Act
Title 1 requirements.
3.
Coordinates and issues the Department's Evidence Act Title 1
deliverables:
a.
Capacity Assessments conducted every four years of the
coverage, methods, quality, independence, effectiveness, and
balance of the Department's evaluation, statistics, research and
analysis portfolio, as well as the Department's ability to support the
planning, conduct, and use of evaluation;
b.
A four-year long Learning Agenda concurrent with the
Strategic Plan, describing priority learning questions and how they
will be addressed through the Department's evidence building; and
C.
An Annual Evaluation Plan concurrent with the Annual
Performance Plan, describing significant evaluations, key
information collections, and related acquisitions planned for the
subsequent year.
4.
Supports internal and public release of evaluation plans,
evaluation reports/summaries, and action plans/reports for the use of
findings, including advising on principled exceptions to the requirement of
public disclosure of evaluations.
5.
Chairs and acts as the secretariat for the DHS Evaluation Officers'
Council (EOC).
6.
Champions capacity building opportunities for DHS as a whole,
while serving as an institutional source of guidance for Components on
evaluation and evidence building.
2
7.
Coordinates or commissions Department-wide and cross-cutting
evaluations, systematic reviews, meta-analyses, or policy research to
address DHS Learning Agenda priority questions.
8.
Supports the integration of evaluation and other evidence-building
plans and findings from the Department's Evidence Act Title 1
deliverables in the development of DHS Strategic Plans, Annual
Performance Plans, Annual Performance Reports, Budget Submissions,
and other planning efforts.
B.
Component Heads:
1.
Ensure compliance with this Evaluation Policy across the breadth
of the Component, including meeting the standards outlined in this
Evaluation Policy and related published instructions for planning,
implementation, dissemination, and use of evaluations.
2.
Appoint an individual with in-depth expertise in evidence building
and evaluation to advise, manage, and/or conduct Component
evaluations and participate in the EOC.
3.
In coordination with the EO, engage in the Evidence Act
processes and development of deliverables.
4.
Consult and coordinate with the Department's relevant officers
(e.g., Evaluation, Statistical, Data, Privacy, Information Security,
Performance Improvement) on development and release of evaluation
plans, evaluation reports/summaries, and action plans/reports on use of
findings, as well as the promotion of secondary uses for the data and
findings.
5.
Develop the Component's capacity for evaluation management
and methods.
6.
Conduct evaluations to examine the performance and outcomes of
programs, policies, regulations, or organizations at a rate commensurate
with the scale of the Component's work, the scope of their portfolio, and
the size of their budget.
7.
Integrate evaluation and other evidence-building plans and
findings from the Department's Evidence Act Title 1 deliverables in the
development of DHS Strategic Plans, Annual Performance Plans, Annual
Performance Reports, Budget Submissions, and other planning efforts.
V. Policy and Requirements
3
A.
Policy: DHS conducts well-designed evaluations to more fully
characterize and account for the ways the Department uses resources to achieve
its goals and objectives. DHS generates and uses rigorous evidence from
evaluations to inform decisions about programs, policies, regulations, and
organizations, better enabling the Department to achieve the most effective U.S.
homeland security outcomes and greater accountability to our primary
stakeholders, the American people. At DHS, evaluation supports:
1.
Organizational learning. Evaluations answer questions that
produce valuable knowledge and inform the Department's understanding
of and ability to respond to mission needs and changes in the
environment.
2.
Program and performance improvement. Evaluations identify
when and how the Department has met its goals, providing leaders with
evidence they need to make decisions about changes that should be
made to increase efficiency and/or effectiveness.
3.
Resource priority determinations. Evaluations help DHS
allocate resources, highlighting where they are needed for greatest
impact. This includes decisions about the future of programs, policies,
regulations, or organizations, such as whether to continue as is,
enhance/scale up, or reduce/scale down.
4.
Stakeholder engagement. Evaluations share valuable
information internally and externally, promoting transparency and
accountability for stewardship of public funds and leading to advances in
research, policy, and practice in and beyond the Department.
B.
Requirements: This Evaluation Policy presents core principles that guide
the conduct of evaluation at DHS to ensure credibility and high-quality evidence
for learning and decision making. These principles align with published Federal
evaluation standards. DHS evaluations should always adhere to these
principles:
1.
Relevance and Utility. DHS evaluations address questions that
are important and provide findings that are actionable and available in
time for use. DHS evaluations consider (1) the learning priorities related
to programs, policies, regulations, or organizations, and (2) the potential
impact on the Department's strategic priorities. Evaluation findings inform
and are integrated into the Department's activities, such as budgeting,
program improvement, management, accountability, and the
development of programs, policies, and regulatory actions.
2.
Rigor. DHS evaluation findings are credible and mean what they
purport to mean. DHS conducts evaluations to the highest standards:
those who conduct DHS evaluations have appropriate expertise for the
4
designs and methods undertaken; designs and methods are appropriate
for the question(s) asked; documentation of evaluation processes and
findings are clear and accurate; and the limitations of findings are
transparent. Internal and external stakeholders can act on evaluation
findings with confidence.
3.
Transparency. DHS is committed to ensuring that the
Department's leadership and staff, collaborators, policymakers,
researchers, and the public at large are able to learn from the
Department's work. DHS is transparent in the planning, implementation,
and reporting of evaluations to enable learning and accountability. The
Department issues a public record of significant evaluations conducted
and shares findings for those evaluations in a timely way (including null
results and results that run counter to the Department's expectations and
goals).
4.
Independence and Objectivity. DHS evaluations are conducted
with an appropriate level of independence from program, policy,
regulation, and stakeholder activities. Those who conduct DHS
evaluations demonstrate objectivity, impartiality, and professional
judgement throughout the evaluation process.
5.
Ethics. DHS evaluations meet the highest ethical standards and
safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of participants,
stakeholders, and affected entities. DHS complies with relevant
professional standards and requirements, such as regulations governing
research involving human subjects. The Department evaluations account
for cultural and contextual factors that could influence findings and the
use of those findings.
C.
DHS Annual Evaluation Plan: The DHS Annual Evaluation Plan consists
of a subset of the Department's evaluation work for the subsequent fiscal year.
These evaluations, designated as significant, are shared publicly and receive
additional resources to ensure successful completion. The list below highlights
the criteria DHS considers when making the significant evaluation designation:
1.
Supports DHS Learning Agenda
2.
Responds to mandate
3.
Aligns with leadership priorities
4.
Has potential for agency-wide impact or engagement
5.
Has potential for high financial impact
6.
Has potential for high stakeholder impact
5
VI. Questions
Address any questions or concerns regarding this Directive to Evaluation Officer,
Office of Program Analysis and Evaluation, Officer of the Chief Financial Officer.
Digitally signed by RANDOLPH D
RANDOLPH D ALLES
ALLES
Date: 2021.02.11 14:55:12-05'00'
R. D. Alles
Date
Deputy Under Secretary for Management
6
