OF
STATES
OF
Department of Defense
Equity Action Plan
April 2022
Table of Contents
List of Acronyms
ii
Executive Summary
1
Summary of Accomplishments
2
Action One: Procurement and Contracting
4
Action Two: Military Installations and Bases
8
Action Three: Military Family Equity Advancement
11
Action Four: Equitable Artificial Intelligence Research and Development
16
Action Five: Underserved Community Investment
20
i
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
List of Acronyms
Abbreviation
Description
Al
Artificial Intelligence
CA
Customer Agreement
COE
Center of Excellence
DEI
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
DEPSCoR
Defense Establish Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
DIU
Defense Innovation Unit
DoD
Department of Defense
DoDEA
Department of Defense Education Activity
DPC
Defense Pricing and Contracting
EO
Executive Order
FY
Fiscal Year
HBCU
Historically Black College and University
HUBZone
Historically Underutilized Business Zone
IPC
Interagency Policy Committee
JAIC
Joint Artificial Intelligence Center
MCCYN
Military Child Care in Your Neighborhood
ML
Machine Learning
MPP
Mentor Protégé Program
MSEP
Military Spouse Employment Partnership
MSI
Minority Serving Institution
NAEP
National Assessment of Education Progress
NALEMP
Native American Lands Environmental Mitigation Program
NPS
National Park Service
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
OSBP
Office of Small Business Programs
PFAS
Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
POAM
Plan of Action and Milestones
PTAC
Procurement Technical Assistance Center
RAB
Restoration Advisory Boards
RAI
Responsible Artificial Intelligence
RIF
Rapid Innovation Fund
SBIR
Small Business Innovation Research
SDB
Small Disadvantaged Business
SDVOSB
Service-Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business
SECO
Spouse Education and Career Opportunities Program
Science, Mathematics, and Research for Transformation
SMART
Scholarship-for-Service Program
STEM
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
STTR
Small Business Technology Transfer
S&T
Science and Technology
TTPTTP
Taking the Pentagon to the People
WOSB
Woman-Owned Small Business
ii
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Executive Summary
In January 2021, the Department of Defense (DoD) took steps to immediately
implement President Biden's Executive Order (EO) 13985, Advancing Racial Equity and
Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government, by conducting
an equity assessment to identify potential barriers that underserved communities and
individuals face regarding Federal programs. The enclosed responds to EO 13985,
which requires Federal agencies to produce an equity action plan.
While the Department has historically focused on increasing equity within the DoD
community, the collective actions described in this plan represent a shift in the
Department's approach and focus to better ensure that we leverage our capabilities to
create opportunities for all Americans. Within 90 days of the issuance of the plan, the
Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer will send the Deputy Secretary of Defense an
implementation plan with clear milestones and completion times for each of the five
actions described below.
These actions demonstrate a Department-wide commitment to this approach and
establish a holistic strategy for continuing to cultivate enduring and equitable change.
Procurement and Contracting: Close gaps in small business participation,
participation by other underserved communities, and improve workforce equity
through an ambitious equitable procurement and contracting agenda that
includes advancing equity throughout the supply chain, such as advancing
opportunities for prime and subcontractors who are members of underserved
communities.
Military Installations: Advance equity for communities around military
installations and bases, including through the Native American Lands
Environmental Mitigation Program, the Defense Environmental Restoration
Program, and prioritizing clean-up of Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS).
Military Families: Advance equity for military families who are members of
underserved communities, including through increased investments and
expanded programming in DoD Educational Activity (DoDEA) schools, improving
economic security and opportunities for military spouses, advancing health
equity, and combating economic challenges experienced by military families
related to housing and food insecurity.
Equitable Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research and Development: Become a
leader on equitable Al research and development through programs such as
Artificial Social Intelligence for Successful Teams, Grounded Al Language
Acquisition Research, and Guaranteeing Al Robustness Against Deception.
Underserved Community Investment: Invest in under-served communities
and expand access to DoD programs and opportunities by increasing
investments in Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and investments in K-12 and
K-20 programs.
1
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Summary of Accomplishments
In January 2021, President Biden issued EO 13985, Advancing Racial Equity and
Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government, which aims to
maximize Federal agencies' approaches to enhancing equity and embedding equity in
decision-making processes. To immediately comply with EO 13985, Secretary Austin
signed a memorandum on January 29, 2021, rescinding all previous Department-level
memoranda implementing EO 13950, Combating Race and Sex Stereotyping. In his
memorandum, the Secretary pledged his "full support and commitment to a cohesive
and ready force that nurtures equal opportunity for all."
Throughout the Department, numerous equity-related efforts have been accomplished
which relate to the five actions in this plan. In February 2021, Secretary Austin directed
commanding officers and supervisors at all levels to conduct a one-day "stand down" for
discussion of the principle that all those who support DoD's mission deserve an
environment free of discrimination, hate, and harassment. This included a focus on how
extremist activities violate the fundamental principles of the Department. Shortly
thereafter, DoD took steps to ensure transgender individuals who wished to serve in the
military and could meet the appropriate standards were able to do so openly and free
from discrimination. The Department accomplished this by revising multiple policies to
bring them into compliance with EO 13985 and EO 14004, Enabling All Qualified
Americans to Serve Their Country in Uniform.
In October 2021, Secretary Austin issued a memorandum emphasizing the important
role of small businesses in the defense industrial base. The memorandum tasked the
DoD Office of Small Business Programs (OSBP) with refreshing the DoD Small
Business Strategy to maximize small business capabilities through a Department-wide
approach. This strategy will better align the Department's efforts with the President's
focus on increasing the share of dollars going to small businesses by lowering barriers
to entry and increasing competition opportunities for small businesses and traditionally
underserved entrepreneurs. OSBP is currently creating an implementation plan to
accompany this new strategy to ensure clear adherence and measures of success for
increasing the small business footprint in the contracting marketplace.
DoDEA has been a trailblazer in leading diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) efforts for
DoD-operated primary and secondary schools. For example, DoDEA released a four-
year strategic initiative in the areas of recruitment and retention, promotion and
development, and teaching and learning; established its Headquarters DEI Team to
identify opportunities for improvement, book studies, and sharing best practices;
provided professional DEI learning and consultation for leaders; and launched DEI
working groups in its eight school districts, three regions, and headquarters.
DoDEA was not the only DoD organization to take steps to foster equity in the education
arena. In Fiscal Year (FY) 2021, to build infrastructure and enhance education
programs at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) and MSI, the
HBCU/MSI Program awarded 70 equipment grants totaling $30.4 million to 32 HBCUs,
37 MSIs, and 1 Tribal College or University. In FY 2021, the Department launched two
new Centers of Excellence (COE) in Biotechnology and Materials Science at HBCUs,
totaling $15 million investments.
2
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
In May 2021, Deputy Secretary of Defense Hicks issued a memorandum reaffirming the
Department's Ethical Principles for Al as being responsible, equitable, traceable,
reliable, and governable. The memo further tasks the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center
(JAIC) to be DoD's coordinator for development and implementation of the Responsible
Artificial Intelligence (RAI) strategy. Similarly, DoD's Defense Innovation Unit (DIU)
publicly released voluntary implementation guidance for responsible Al, which provides
a practical approach for incorporating DoD's Al Ethics Principles in Al product planning,
development, testing, and evaluation.
The Department also took action to address adverse equity-related effects that occur
within its military family population due to changing regional and national-level economic
factors. The Secretary announced a series of economic and food security initiatives in
November 2021, which included temporary increases in Basic Allowance for Housing,
and increases in authorizations for Temporary Lodging Expenses. DoD also released a
Military Leader's Economic Security Toolkit with specific resources for leaders on how
to identify Service members who are struggling to feed themselves and their families,
how to engage in difficult conversations to assess food insecurity, and connect Service
members to additional resources and support programs. Furthermore, DoD introduced
two pilot offerings, FlexJobs and Udemy, to bolster military spouse employment
opportunities.
3
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Action One: Procurement and Contracting
The Department implements programs that are designed to increase participation of
small businesses, including small businesses from socio-economic categories and other
underserved communities in DoD procurements for delivery of products, services, and
technologies that benefit the warfighter. Additionally, the Department emphasizes
contracting with entities employing individuals with disabilities under the AbilityOne
Program and statutory pilot authorities. The Department also uses its acquisitions to
drive equitable employment conditions for industry workforce on military projects.
Through its equity efforts, the Department seeks to close participation opportunity gaps
for underserved communities through an ambitious, equitable procurement and
contracting agenda that includes advancing equity throughout the supply chain. This
agenda is anticipated to result in a more competitive and robust defense industrial base
delivering combat and support capabilities, with the collateral effect of increasing equity.
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
While assessing participation by small businesses (including categories of small
businesses) as well as by AbilityOne entities, the Department identified the following
barriers:
DoD-specific procurement and contracting processes and compliance
requirements.
Lack of simplified and clear entry points for small businesses into the defense
marketplace.
Unclear communication of opportunities for small businesses and lack of access
to information on requirements for bid.
Financial instability and other inequitable working conditions for the contractor
workforce.
These barriers inhibit the interest and ability of some businesses, particularly small
businesses, to pursue DoD procurement opportunities.
Action Plan to Reduce Barriers
To address these barriers, the Department identified three actions:
Set, resource, and implement a galvanizing goal around advancing opportunities
for prime and subcontractors who are members of underserved communities.
To drive the increase of small business participation opportunities in DoD acquisitions,
including participation by small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs), women-owned small
businesses (WOSBs), service-disabled Veteran owned small businesses (SDVOSBs)
and businesses located in historically underutilized business (HUB) zones, the
Department will capitalize on ongoing strategic planning efforts such as the DoD Small
Business Strategy and its implementation plan.
The Department also increased its SDB goal in support of the President's equity
agenda, and will fully implement the other management actions called for by Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) M-22-03, Advancing Equity in Federal Procurement
4
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
(December 2, 2021). For example, DoD will utilize disaggregated data on the federal
contract spend, including by race and ethnicity, to help understand where disparities
exist. Further, DoD will issue guidance to its acquisition workforce emphasizing
adjustments to the category management planning and scoring process starting in FY
2022 in alignment with the Administration's recently announced reforms in OMB M-22-
03.
The Department will also encourage and resource additional reviews of contracting
opportunities, including opportunities below the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, by
Small Business Professionals for Section 8(a) SDB set-asides and greater participation
by Section 8(a) SDBs. DoD will resource and deploy market intelligence tools to the
acquisition workforce, including small business professionals, to improve market
research and facilitate identification of capable suppliers for defense contracts from
underserved communities. This will support increasing set-aside competitions for small
businesses, including socioeconomic categories, thus opening up entry points for these
businesses to participate in the defense marketplace.
To improve clarity of small businesses opportunities DoD will continue to develop and
update the DoD OSBP website (https://business.defense.gov and the websites of
Component OSBPs into one-stop shops for small businesses to access information on
small business programs, resources available to small businesses, and toolkits on how
to do business with DoD. This will include integration of the work of Procurement
Technical Assistance Centers (PTACs), which provide counseling support to small
businesses that are looking to compete for DoD contracts or perform on current
contracts, with DoD's acquisition workforce for unity of effort. These PTACs help
overcome the barriers to small businesses that struggle to meet DoD-specific
contracting procurement practices and requirements. The Department intends to create
processes that would enable DoD Small Business Professionals to leverage PTACs in
conducting targeted market research and assistance efforts to support specific
acquisitions. The Department will also create a unified management structure of small
business programs to ensure long-term planning that better enables small businesses,
to participate in DoD's programs and have a streamlined entry point into the defense
marketplace.
DoD also has several small business and small business-focused programs that
support and invest in research, development, and manufacturing capabilities and
innovation in key technology sectors having the greatest impact on the American middle
class worker. These programs include, for example, the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Program, the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Program,
the Mentor-Protégé Program (MPP), the Rapid Innovation Fund (RIF) Program, the
Technology Transfer Program, the National Security Innovation Network, the DIU, the
National Security Innovation Capital Program, the Manufacturing Technology Program,
the Title III of the Defense Production Act Program, the Industrial Base Analysis and
Sustainment Program, and the Manufacturing Innovation Institutes. DoD will work
across these programs and others such as MPP and SBIR/STTR to ensure that awards
and investments are made to small business firms across the underserved
communities, including by establishing small business participation or assistance
baselines. The Department will also work to stabilize small business programs through
5
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
permanent reauthorization (e.g., MPP, SBIR/STTR) and dedicated funding (e.g., MPP,
RIF). Finally, in order to effectively implement small business equity efforts, the
Department will resource the Offices of Small Business Programs through the
President's budget.
In addition to ensuring maximum practicable participation for small businesses in
Departmental acquisitions, the Department also seeks to increase participation by
AbilityOne entities. The DoD AbilityOne program has pledged to grow the federal-wide
AbilityOne program over the next five years from 0.55% to 1.0% of DoD contract
spending. This increase will match DoD's mission needs with AbilityOne capabilities to
grow employment and career opportunities for Americans with disabilities, including
service-disabled veterans who are not small business owners.
Advance equity through requirements on wage setting and labor practices in the
DoD contractor workforce and supply chain.
DoD is working closely with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and other
Federal stakeholders to implement EO 14026, which mandates a $15.00 minimum
wage for service contract workers on Federal contracts. DoD is actively participating in
policy development to enforce union negotiating rights, use Project Labor Agreements
where appropriate on construction contracts, and strengthen apprenticeship programs
in critical trades.
DoD also makes targeted workforce investments to ensure our national security needs
are met. The Department invests in apprenticeships, community college programs,
manufacturing training, trade support, and a variety of other education and training
programs that could both close existing gender, racial, and opportunity gaps and
strengthen economic security. As the Department invests in the defense innovation and
industrial base ecosystems, it will seek to ensure that its investments address existing
equity gaps in the defense industrial base.
Empower small business programs and initiatives to lead policy and management
practices across the Department.
DoD will ensure that leadership of small business programs within the Department is
empowered, resourced, and has access to DoD senior leadership to lead policy
management practices across the Department. DoD will also continue to implement its
mandatory performance element for Senior Executives and General/Flag Officers,
where applicable, who oversee acquisitions to support small business goal attainment,
outreach, and acquisition planning. DoD will ensure small business professionals are
empowered consistent with the Small Business Act and existing DoD policy.
Tracking Progress
To determine progress on these actions, the DoD OSBP, in coordination with
Component OSBPs, and the Defense Pricing and Contracting (DPC) Office will develop
an enterprise-wide plan of action and milestones (POAM) for acquisition that may be
released in phases associated with their respective focus areas. The annual DoD small
business goals and the biennial implementation plans for the updated DoD Small
Business Strategy shall serve as the POAM on small business equity matters. For the
AbilityOne Program and contractor workforce equity, the POAMs will be further
6
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
established through DPC guidance. The DoD OSBP and DPC will then track the
progress of each action and milestone to ensure timely progression. After completing
all exploratory actions, the DoD OSBP and DPC will re-assess next steps and update or
continue to develop the enterprise-wide acquisition POAMs. Successful completion of
each goal and action item will be evaluated by DoD OSBP and DPC via routine equity
assessments.
Accountability
To remain accountable to identified overarching goals, the Department will routinely
assess DoD acquisition opportunities for small business, AbilityOne, and contractor
workforce equity factors. The Department will also conduct a review of the
empowerment of DoD and Component OSBPs and of small business professionals
across the Military Departments and Defense Agencies. As part of the POAMs, the
DoD OSBP and DPC will assume responsibility as primary offices of responsibility for
routine acquisition equity assessments within their cognizance. The Department will
also continue to reduce barriers to entry, streamline how it communicates information
and opportunities to small businesses and simplify entry points into the defense
marketplace for small businesses.
7
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Action Two: Military Installations and Bases
DoD seeks to advance equity and rectify past harms for communities around military
installations and bases.
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
DoD operational and training activities during the World War II and Cold War
eras resulted in adverse environmental, health, and economic impacts to some
communities, including Native American communities. Historically, DoD built
some temporary bases and practice bombing ranges on and near Native
American lands, Alaska Native Claims Settlement-conveyed properties, ancestral
lands, and reserved treaty rights areas. Legacy impacts from operations at these
bases and ranges may include hazardous materials, debris, underground fuel
storage tanks, lead-based paint, asbestos, munitions/explosives residue, and
abandoned or unsafe sites. These impacts can sometimes create a barrier to
Indigenous populations remaining on those lands by potentially hindering their
development or protection of the land including their development of the land for
housing or commercial purposes (e.g., harvesting timber), or protecting the land
for subsistence food gathering or cultural practices held in the area. Current
training and operational activities, while still significant, are conducted in a
manner as to reduce adverse impacts.
More recently, DoD's efforts to expand its footprint on Guam may result in additional
stress on the infrastructure of the island and the local population, much of which falls
into an underserved community based on race or poverty level. Finally, the construction
of a new installation in Guam coupled with the surge in military construction projects at
legacy installations has increased the quantity of unearthed artifacts. The only certified
repository on Guam is very small and is operated by the National Park Service (NPS) to
curate the NPS's War in the Pacific collection.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
To address the barriers identified above, the Department identified two actions:
Evaluate which communities may be experiencing negative environmental,
health, or economic effects, due to proximity to DoD testing sites, bases, or
munitions sites, and invest in mitigating those effects and advancing equitable
outcomes for those communities.
The Department has implemented and will continue to build upon a variety of programs
intended to address the impacts of past DoD operational activities and siting of bases
and ranges. For example, since 1996, DoD has administered the Native American
Lands Environmental Mitigation Program (NALEMP) and invests at least $12 million per
year into NALEMP-funded programs. Funding provided through NALEMP Cooperative
Agreements (CAs) enables tribal governments to lead NALEMP projects, incorporate
"traditional ecological knowledge" into design for cleanup, and build tribal capacity
regarding environmental services and technical remediation skills. In FY 2021, DoD
executed a total of 15 NALEMP CAs, 10 of which were with Alaska Native tribes and 5
of which were with Native American tribes in the lower 48 states. By the end of FY
8
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
2022, DoD will execute an additional 13 NALEMP CAs: 10 with Alaska Native tribes
and 3 with Native American tribes in the lower 48 states.
The Department also has programs that conduct environmental restoration activities
(Defense Environmental Restoration Program), clean up contamination from a
hazardous substance or pollutant or contaminant (Installation Restoration Program),
and address munitions responses sites (Military Munitions Response Program). By the
end of FY 2020, DoD, in cooperation with state agencies and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, completed cleanup activities at 85% of its cleanup sites - out of a
total of 40,037 sites - and is now monitoring the results to ensure these completed
cleanups remain protective.
Another of DoD's cleanup priorities is for PFAS releases. DoD is performing an
assessment at 700 installations where DoD may have used or potentially released
PFAS. As part of the cleanup process, DoD is addressing both drinking water (a short-
term action) and groundwater (a long-term action). For this effort, DoD works in
collaboration with the Environmental Protection Agency, other Federal agencies, and
communities throughout this process.
In FY 2022, DoD anticipates investing over $1.4 billion in programs that address
legacy impacts from past DoD actions.
Seek opportunities for significant new investments in underserved communities
around military bases and installations.
The Department is taking steps to invest in the community and upgrade the local
infrastructure in Guam. Specifically, DoD has provided approximately $218 million in
appropriated funding for outside-the-fence investments, including a cultural repository
($12 million), public health lab ($32 million), upgrades to the Northern Water Waste
Treatment Plant ($139.3 million), Interceptor Sewer Refurbishment ($30.6 million),
Northern Guam Lens Aquifer Monitoring System ($3.7 million), and surface
transportation network improvements ($246 million).
The Department also invests significantly in managing and restoring habitats and
wildlife populations both on our installations and with partners in the surrounding
communities. One example is the conservation and recovery of threatened and
endangered species, as well as common wildlife such as migratory birds and game
species. In addition, numerous installations provide public access to nature and
opportunities for hunting, fishing, camping, and other outdoor recreation activities. DoD
also partners with conservation organizations to maintain compatible land uses
surrounding DoD installations. These partnerships have established public recreation
opportunities such as Wildlife Management Areas, public parks, river trail access and
other resources available to underserved communities. DoD conservation investments
exceed $400 million per year.
Tracking Progress
Due to the nature of the effort, the Department anticipates long-term operation of many
of the environmental restoration or cleanup programs, as they are integral to the
Department's stewardship of the natural resources entrusted to its care. However,
9
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
progress on PFAS clean-up specifically is included in quarterly public meetings and
regular updates to the PFAS website: https://denix.osd.mil/dod-pfas/.
For the ongoing work in Guam, DoD established specific inter-governmental working
groups for each authorized project, consisting of relevant subject matter experts from
other Federal Agencies and the Government of Guam. These working groups meet on
a recurring basis to monitor project progress and to provide technical assistance as
required. Furthermore, DoD actively monitors and manages the grants in Guam that
implement these activities to ensure compliance with the grant award terms and
conditions.
Accountability
The Department recognizes that it needs to listen to and engage with the impacted
communities and strives to openly share information and collect input throughout the
cleanup process. One DoD-unique community engagement tool is the use of
Restoration Advisory Boards (RAB), which provides communities or individuals
affected by DoD cleanup activities with a forum for focused dialogue on the
installation's cleanup program. RABs are community-oriented forums that encourage
and facilitate communication between citizens and installation decision-makers
regarding DoD cleanups. RAB participants may include representatives from the
community, installation, State, local or tribal governments, local activities, and federal,
State, or local regulatory agencies. Participants review cleanup progress and provide
comments and advice to the installation's decision-makers. Because the Department
values this tool and its benefits so highly, we provide administrative and financial
support for RABs to ensure they are sufficiently resourced to create effective
partnerships.
Finally, the Department provides a variety of annual reports to Congress that
summarize the Department's restorative, conservation, and clean-up activities.
10
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Action Three: Military Family Equity Advancement
The Department seeks to advance equity for military families who are members of
underserved communities. This includes advancing equity in healthcare; driving
towards more equitable outcomes for students of color, students with disabilities, and
students from other underserved communities in DoD schools; improving economic
security and opportunity for military spouses; and combating food insecurity and other
economic challenges experienced by military families.
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
The individuals who choose to serve in our nation's Armed Forces make sacrifices of
their time, talents, careers, and, in some instances, their lives, in order to maintain and
strengthen the United States military. These sacrifices extend to the spouses and
children of Service members who are often uprooted from employment, family, friends,
and schools, relocated to new geographic locations every few years, and expected to
adapt and maintain resiliency within their families. As of 2020, there were 1.5 million
active duty family members. DoD has a responsibility to ensure that these family
members, including those who are members of an underserved community, are not
inequitably impacted as they support the DoD mission.
Service members and their families are stationed throughout the world, which can result
in a lack of access to educational options. Most public schools on military installations
in the continental U.S. are operated by the local community's public school district.
Public school districts, particularly those in rural or remote locations, may have limited
financial resources or capacity to address facility deficiencies or provide special
education programs for students with disabilities.
Another barrier experienced by military families is the loss of a steady second income
due to the inability of military spouses to maintain consistent employment
commensurate with their qualifications. Military spouses face challenges in securing
and maintaining meaningful employment due to the demands of the mobile military
lifestyle, such as frequent moves and single parenting during deployments of the
military member. Additionally, DoD surveys reveal that military spouse moves and lack
of access to childcare are contributing factors that reduce the likelihood of military
spouse employment. Of the approximately 598,000 active duty military spouses who
want to work, the unemployment rate has consistently hovered around 22% (pre-
coronavirus pandemic). Spouse unemployment may decrease economic or food
security in the family.
Another barrier which may be experienced by military families who frequently change
geographic locations and are members of underserved communities is equitable access
to health care.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
To address the barriers identified above, the Department identified four actions:
Drive towards more equitable outcomes for students of color, students with
disabilities, and other underserved students in DoD schools.
11
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
To address inequities in schools operated by local public school districts, DoD may
make grants, enter cooperative agreements, or expend other Federal resources to
construct, renovate, repair, or expand elementary and secondary public schools on
military installations in order to address capacity or facility condition deficiencies.
Funding is provided based on the rank of the school's listing on the Public Schools on
Military Installations Priority List.
The Department is also working to ensure equitable access to challenging courses for
students who attend educational programs administered by DoD. DoDEA is a leader in
achievement for underrepresented students, with African-American/Black and
Hispanic/Latinx DoDEA students receiving among the highest assessment scores in the
nation, outperforming their peers in 96% of states in 4th grade and 8th grade math, and
98% of states in reading on the most recent National Assessment of Education
Progress (NAEP). Similar performance trends exist on the NAEP among students with
disabilities, with DoDEA students with disabilities outperforming their peers in all other
states in 8th grade reading. DoDEA also focuses on equitable access to AP courses,
and is increasing in both participation and performance, particularly across racial
minorities. For example, DoDEA offers open access to AP courses and utilizes the
College Board's "AP potential tool" to identify students who have the achievement
record to succeed in AP courses but may not have enrolled in these courses.
Furthermore, DoDEA is implementing innovative special education programs to provide
more inclusive educational experiences. These programs include Robot-Assisted
Instruction to enhance instruction for students with autism, Alternate Content Standards
so that students with cognitive disabilities can access the College and Career Ready
Standards, and customized professional development for special education teachers.
Finally, DoDEA organized a division that focuses solely on advancing diversity, equity,
and inclusion. This division will examine, identify, and eliminate inequities, barriers, and
gaps in DEI in all aspects, including recruitment, teaching and learning, and creating a
staff and student climate that is growth-producing. Additionally, they are embedding
culturally responsive teaching strategies in the professional learning for educators to
meet the individual needs of all students.
Improve economic security and opportunity for military spouses.
To implement this action, DoD is pursuing three lines of effort: spouse employment,
childcare, and in-home fee assistance. For spouse employment, DoD has multiple
programs aimed to address this issue. One such program, the Spouse Education and
Career Opportunities (SECO) program provides information, tools, and resources
designed to assist military spouses in achieving their educational and employment
goals. In addition, the Military Spouse Employment Partnership (MSEP), an initiative
under the SECO program, is comprised of more than 540 employer partners that have
committed to recruiting, hiring, promoting, and retaining military spouses. DoD will
continue to build on those partnerships to provide spouses with rewarding job
opportunities. In December 2021, SECO, in partnership with MSEP partner, Instant
Teams, is piloting a workforce development program that will provide spouses the
opportunity for post-training job placement with a MSEP employer. Furthermore, SECO
is also working to provide resources and opportunities to support entrepreneurship that
12
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
will allow for greater flexibility to build a career that meets the needs of a military
spouse.
To address the barrier presented by lack of childcare, DoD is not only looking to expand
on-base options for child development centers, but is also expanding the Military Child
Care in Your Neighborhood (MCCYN)-PLUS initiative. Because safety is a preeminent
priority, DoD requires off-post childcare providers to meet various requirements. For
example, Service members may only enroll and use fee assistance for off-post childcare
programs that are nationally accredited. Despite fee assistance to obtain childcare in
the civilian community, some military families are unable to locate approved childcare
providers. In order to address this problem, the Department launched the MCCYN-
PLUS program in Maryland and Virginia in 2019. While still maintaining high standards,
this program allows the Service members to use childcare providers enrolled in a state's
Child Care Quality Rating and Improvement System, rather than national accreditation
which can be cumbersome and expensive. Building on the success in Maryland and
Virginia, the Department expanded MCCYN-PLUS to Nevada in September 2021 and
projects expansion to California and Washington in early 2022. DoD is considering
expanding the program to Colorado, North Carolina, Florida, and Texas because these
areas have large populations of military families.
End food insecurity among military families.
The Department is taking immediate steps to address food insecurity, beginning with
developing a strategy and implementation roadmap on strengthening food security
across the Force, which will include lines of effort to better understand the causes of
food insecurity, address causes such as spouse unemployment and financial decision-
making, and explore resources to enhance access to healthy food choices.
Additionally, DoD is actively participating in the Joining Forces Interagency Policy
Committee (IPC) addressing food insecurity in the military. The IPC effort will identify
areas of collaboration between agencies that will ultimately result in a report outlining
plans for future research.
The Department also recognizes that a military family's economic status is closely
linked to the Service member's grade and position in the military. Accordingly, DoD is
implementing a range of initiatives to ensure equity for minority Service members at
critical career touchpoints, to include recruiting and accessions, progression and
promotion, and at the senior leader level.
Advance health equity in the Military Health System and benefits systems.
In some instances, when determined to be medically necessary, DoD provides limited
infertility diagnosis and treatment for eligible beneficiaries in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations. Additionally, adoption is supported by DoD through its leave
programs. For Service members who are not looking to start or expand their family,
TRICARE also covers certain contraception devices and medications such as intra-
uterine devices, birth control pills, and morning-after pills ("Plan B").
Importantly, TRICARE Prime Access to Care standards are established for all
beneficiaries enrolled in TRICARE Prime, regardless of race or gender. Moreover,
DoD's Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences published two studies
13
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
which found that universal access to health care alleviates disparities for African-
American patients and mitigated higher rates of Potentially Avoidable Maternal
Complications among minority women. DoD is pleased it offers universal health
coverage to covered beneficiaries.
Finally, DoD policy prohibits discrimination on the basis of gender identity or
identification as transgender, provides a means by which individuals who meet
applicable standards may access into the military in their self-identified gender, provides
a means by which transitioning Service members may obtain gender-affirming medical
treatment and recognition of their self-identified gender, and seeks to protect the privacy
of all Service members. The Department is taking steps to fully implement this policy.
Tracking Progress
In the short term, schools on military installations will be renovated or constructed to
ensure an equitable, safe, and healthy learning environment for the children of military
families. Congress has appropriated over $2 billion for the Public Schools on Military
Installations Program. Investments to date have resulted in replacement, expansion, or
renovation of 18 schools, with 12 schools under construction (many nearing
completion), and another 16 in various stages of proposal/design development. These
projects are planned to benefit over 26,000 students annually, with over 70% of those
being DoD-connected. The goal of this program is to reinforce with military families that
children who attend these schools are learning in a safe and healthy environment.
To track progress in curriculum-related equity actions, DoDEA will use DEI working
group feedback, professional learning evaluations, student achievement data, and AP
class enrollment. Long-term success will be demonstrated by:
Increased use of culturally responsive teaching strategies to meet the needs of
all students.
Increased use of inclusive instructional practices such as co-teaching to provide
more access to challenging courses for students with disabilities.
Increased student achievement on assessments by special populations of
students (e.g., students of color, special needs students, gender)
Established DEI working groups throughout DoDEA by June 2022.
Inclusion of DEI as a priority in the Director's FY22 focus.
To track the progress of improving economic security, the SECO program, will monitor
and report pilot program promotion and uptake to Department leaders, and determine
whether to extend the pilot to additional MSEP employer partners. Moreover, DoD will
continue to monitor the expansion and effectiveness of childcare programs and
opportunities via the Deputy's Workforce Council. Near-term success will be measured
by military spouses participating in the workforce development pilot, taking advantage of
expanded job opportunities in MSEP, and military families enrolling in expanded
childcare opportunities. In the long-term, DoD aims to reduce the unemployment rate
for military spouses.
14
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
DoD is developing an implementation roadmap to address the issue of food insecurity.
This implementation roadmap will include milestones and will include a briefing to the
Deputy Secretary through the Deputy's Workforce Council. Additionally, the Joining
Forces Initiative will track the progress of the IPC on Food Insecurity. Near-term
success will be measured by military leaders understanding the challenges and degrees
of food insecurity and providing Service members and families with tools and resources
to address food insecurity. In the long-term, DoD strives to reduce reports of food
insecurity within the Department.
In the health care realm, DoD will use industry-standard quality control processes to
gauge the ease, access, and satisfaction related to the health care services.
Accountability
First and foremost, DoD is accountable to the military families who participate in these
services. Accordingly, DoD will work with the local public school districts to survey
military families about their satisfaction with the renovated or newly built schools. Within
DoDEA, the Director will communicate his focus as part of DoDEA's strategic plan, The
Blueprint for Continuous Improvement, in January 2022, which will include an emphasis
on diversity, equity, and inclusion for the students, families, and employees. This initial
introduction will be followed up with in-progress reviews at leadership meetings in
February 2022 and June 2022, as well as routine monthly meetings. Finally, DoDEA
has developed a communication plan that includes a website to provide ongoing
updates to its external stakeholders, and DEI-related articles for the DoDEA workforce.
The White House has been involved in efforts involving economic security, with both the
Joining Forces initiative, which identifies spouse employment as an area of focus, and
the IPC on food insecurity. Accordingly, the IPC similarly will be updated via briefings
and reports as to the Department's progress on these efforts. Furthermore, spouse
employment, childcare availability, and food insecurity are frequently topics of interest
with both Congress and the media. As such, the Department will respond to related
queries in the near- and long-term.
The Military Health System will communicate progress through routine channels to its
beneficiaries and other key stakeholders. Regarding the updated policies providing
protection to transgender Service members, internal accountability on key issues
focused on readiness, equity, evolving medical science, and organizational culture are
reviewed by the Accession Medical Standards Working Group and Transgender Care
Integrated Product Team. The recommendations of the work groups are accountable to
the Medical and Personnel Executive Steering Committee and Deputy's Workforce
Council.
15
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Action Four: Equitable Artificial Intelligence Research and
Development
The Department is dedicated to the safe and ethical use of Al technology and will
continue to advance best practices for developing, testing, and deploying Al responsibly
and equitably.
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
As the Department progresses in its efforts to develop and integrate Al into decision-
making processes that impact DoD services and programs provided to the American
people, DoD seeks to incorporate equity in its ethical Al development practices. Al has
demonstrated remarkable benefits in helping to improve organizational efficiency.
However, modern applications of technology like machine learning (ML) can raise
ethical concerns due to the scope, scale, and speed at which they operate, potentially
learning and magnifying existing inequities that influenced historical data. Examples of
these issues have been reported in non-DoD systems, such as initial Al face recognition
algorithms having difficulty recognizing darker skinned individuals, and initial Al resume
screening algorithms learning and magnifying the biases of human screeners.
Ethical and equitable Al begins with good data. Poor and incomplete training data are
the single largest known contributors to Al bias. Modernizing the Department through
digitization and data collection are key first steps to controlling for the potential
algorithmic bias we know can express in smart systems. Therefore, as the Department
pushes forward on data collection and curation projects through its components, the
Department is simultaneously implementing these ethical principles in its Al programs.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
The DoD is working to implement Al into its day to day business and warfighting
operations. The Department's emphasis and commitment to ethical Al includes the
following five principles:
1. Responsible. DoD personnel will exercise appropriate levels of judgment and
care, while remaining responsible for the development, deployment, and use of
Al capabilities.
2. Equitable. The Department will take deliberate steps to minimize unintended
bias in Al capabilities.
3. Traceable. The Department's Al capabilities will be developed and deployed
such that relevant personnel possess an appropriate understanding of the
technology, development processes, and operational methods applicable to Al
capabilities, including with transparent and auditable methodologies, data
sources, and design procedure and documentation.
4. Reliable. The Department's Al capabilities will have explicit, well-defined uses,
and the safety, security, and effectiveness of such capabilities will be subject to
testing and assurance within those defined uses across their entire life-cycles.
5. Governable. The Department will design and engineer Al capabilities to fulfill
their intended functions while possessing the ability to detect and avoid
16
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
unintended consequences, and the ability to disengage or deactivate deployed
systems that demonstrate unintended behavior.
Al need not be a threat to equity; it can also be an ally. Al can help the Department
map innovative new pathways toward greater equity in hiring, promotion, retention, and
workforce management. Well-designed and continuously tested systems will also
ensure that when we must use the tools of lethality, that we do so in keeping with our
national values. Additionally, the DoD is among the largest data holders in the world, to
include health and medical data like that of the Joint Pathology Center that holds the
world's largest tissue archive. This type of comprehensive data resource, combined
with carefully constructed Al, could be harnessed for next generation cancer and other
research with direct benefits to military readiness, as well as for the national and global
medical research population. Indeed, this data is extremely valuable as the U.S.
military is one of the country's most diverse institutions.
To address the barriers identified above, the Department identified the following action:
Create a DoD-wide responsible Al development framework to ensure ethical (to
include equitable) Al in business as well as battlefield operations.
Over the past decade, the Department has been leaning forward to ensure the
responsible development, deployment, and use of Al within its operations. In October
2019, the Defense Innovation Board released a report titled Al Principles:
Recommendations on the Ethical Use of Artificial Intelligence by the Department of
Defense. In February 2020, following the recommendations from the Defense
Innovation Board, the Secretary of Defense adopted the five ethical principles for use of
Al. The second of these principles, "equitable,' ensures that any Al deployed by the
DoD will minimize potential biases. The Department is working to create
implementation plans for these principles.
In May 2021, the Deputy Secretary of Defense issued a memorandum titled
Implementing Responsible Artificial Intelligence in the Department of Defense. This
memorandum established tenets for RAI: RAI Governance, Warfighter Trust, Al
Product and Acquisition Lifecycle, Requirements Validation, Responsible Al Ecosystem,
and Al Workforce. The JAIC was tasked to be the Department's coordinator for
development and implementation of the RAI Strategy. Furthermore, in November
2021,
the DIU publicly released voluntary implementation guidance for responsible Al
(https://www.diu.mil/responsible-ai-guidelines). This guidance provides practical
direction for how to include the DoD's Al Ethics Principles, including equity, in Al
product planning, development, testing, and evaluation. Finally, the Test Resource
Management Center, working in collaboration with the JAIC, is creating a framework
that provides comprehensive, continuously updated, risk assessments to critical
decision makers across the DoD on the end-to-end weapon system life cycle. This
holistic approach encapsulates the DoD's Al Ethical Principles and the Responsible Al
tenets.
Looking further into the future, the DoD is currently funding Al research on ethical Al. A
few examples of DoD research programs in this area are:
17
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering is
sponsoring a current topic in DoD's social science basic research program,
Minerva, on the "Social and Cultural Implications of Artificial Intelligence," which
seeks to understand the process by which social and cultural practices influence
algorithmic and technology development. This is aimed at better understanding
where biases exist within systems and how they may affect people differently
across various cultural contexts.
U.S. Army Development Command is expanding the study of moral dilemmas to
consider the risk profile of the situation and expand the space of acceptable
solutions for these dilemmas. In so doing, researchers are contributing to the
development of autonomous technology that abides by acceptable moral norms.
The Naval Research Laboratory is exploring ways to build human-like capacities
for control, including self-control, into a computational cognitive architecture with
direct application to the concepts of "agency" and "responsibility" implied by both
every day and legal usage of those terms.
The Air Force Research Laboratory Autonomy Capability Team 3 is working
closely with community leaders in Cincinnati, Ohio, to develop agent-based
modeling and machine learning to reduce violence and improve quality of life in
minority neighborhoods.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's Explainable Al program
aims to create a suite of ML techniques that give ML systems the capability to
explain their rationale for actions and decisions, to characterize their strengths
and weaknesses, and to convey an understanding of how they might
behave/perform in future missions or scenarios.
Finally, a more diverse Al workforce will likely increase our ability to anticipate potential
inequities (or recognize any that begin to emerge) and proactively mitigate them. DoD's
partnerships with HBCUs/MSIs aim to overcome barriers in by fostering minority entry
into the Al Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) workforce.
Furthermore, DoD will continue to make investments in HBCUs/MSIs through its COEs
and grants. The Department will continue to monitor the Al COE outputs and funding.
A more thorough discussion on the impact of these HBCU/MSI engagements is
provided in Action Five.
Tracking Progress
The Department's goal is to develop a DoD-wide responsible Al development
framework to ensure ethical (to include equitable) Al in operations. DIU has drafted a
best-practice document for developing responsible Al that conforms to DoD's Al Ethics
Principles and the Responsible Al tenets. Every year, this document will be reviewed
and updated by the Al DoD science and technology community to assure that these
guidelines reflect current best practices. The newly established Chief Digital Artificial
Intelligence Office, which is responsible for the adoption of Al and its ethics and equity
principles in operations, will create a process for ensuring the implementation of these
best practices across the Department in its adoption of Al into operations.
18
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Accountability
The Department will release its implementation plans and guidance publicly at
academic and international forums as well as industrial Al conferences to solicit
feedback and ensure that DoD S&T plans and guidance reflect best practices.
19
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
Action Five: Underserved Community Investment
The Department seeks to invest in under-served communities and expand access to
DoD programs and opportunities. This includes advancing equity in K-12, college, and
university settings through DoD programs, partnerships, and federal grant opportunities.
This also capitalizes on military training initiatives that impact underserved communities.
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
During its equity assessment, the Department explored a variety of programs to find
barriers to participation that members of underserved communities may encounter
preventing or limiting their ability to participate in DoD programs. In particular, DoD is
interested in fostering growth in STEM fields. DoD identified the following barriers:
The lack of resources available to HBCUs/MSIs limits expanding infrastructure and
research capacity.
Resource and funding constraints limit the extent to which DoD programs engage
with MSIs. The Department will review these requirements during its annual
program and budget review to ensure appropriate resources are provided for MSI
initiatives that align with Department strategic priorities.
Despite upward trends, few DoD senior leadership roles are occupied by leaders
from MSIs. Currently, DoD senior leadership does not represent the racial and
ethnic makeup of the population the Department serves.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
To address the barriers identified above, the Department will implement the following
two actions:
Coordinate expanding investments in Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) across
the country.
Though DoD helps to increase the research and educational capacity of HBCUs/MSIs
and fosters workforce diversity and entry of underrepresented minorities into STEM
disciplines, the program is limited by HBCUs'/MSIs' ability to withstand expansion of
their research capacity. Accordingly, the Department will focus on refining and
expanding its programs that work specifically with MSIs. The HBCU/MSI Program will
continue to invest in MSIs by funding research, enhancing infrastructure, and promoting
workforce development. This includes the Department's efforts to promote MSI
involvement in DoD research activities and to build the STEM pipeline. One of these
efforts is the establishment of COEs in DoD's priority areas, including Al and ML. The
Al/ML COE addresses current and future research and engineering challenges for safe,
robust, and trustworthy Al that support DoD's modernization applications. DoD seeks to
engage MSIs in the Al/ML COE. To do this, DoD will include MSIs in the founding and
membership of COEs. Furthermore, the Department will pursue awarding research
grants to MSIs with the intent to advance capabilities and contributions to the workforce.
Recently, the Science, Mathematics, and Research for Transformation Scholarship-for-
Service (SMART) program created a strategy to increase diversity within the SMART
program and the DoD civilian employee pipeline. This strategy includes activities and
20
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
approaches to attract students from MSIs to the program. The strategy also includes
educating participating DoD sponsoring facilities on the technical strengths of MSIs and
the benefits of collaboration with them.
SMART continues to implement a broad range of diversity and inclusion efforts targeting
underrepresented/underserved groups through university visits, marketing, social
media, and informational webinars. The SMART Program office has sponsored 40-50
university visits (now virtual information sessions) and two webinars, and is continuing
to plan for additional events in FY 2022. Moreover, in FYs 2022 and 2023, SMART
plans to establish enduring partnerships with HBCU/MSIs through their administration,
faculty, and staff; create opportunities with COEs to increase awareness and
participation in SMART; and to build consortium and/or affinity group partnerships.
The Department seeks to develop research capacity in states and at institutions that
have traditionally received less research funding from the Department with its Defense
Establish Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (DEPSCoR). DEPSCoR
performs outreach to underserved communities that includes bringing DoD program
managers on regional site visits. This provides researchers an opportunity to meet with
DoD leaders and understand the areas in which the Department's research is currently
focused. DEPSCoR also pairs researchers in underserved states and institutions,
including MSIs, with researchers who are experienced in working with the Department,
thus enabling novice researchers to be mentored by DoD researchers.
DoD is also developing strategies for future Taking the Pentagon to the People
(TTPTTP) events. These strategies focus on strengthening the sustainable impact of
America's institutions by supporting underserved institutions and communities and
ensuring MSI participation in COEs. To accomplish these goals, TTPTTP will continue:
Refining strategic outreach and collaborative partnerships with affinity groups and
organizations that aim to expand access of underserved communities, improve racial
equity in the U.S., and bolster the ranks and presence of minorities working in DoD.
Facilitating events between key DoD and MSI senior leaders through Presidential
Roundtables. This allows DoD and MSI senior leaders to engage in meaningful
dialogue on ways to enhance the infrastructure and build capacity for underserved
communities.
Aligning DoD senior leaders with functional efforts to advance equity outcomes and
increase MSI access to DoD internships, contracts, grants, scholarships, surplus
equipment, and research and development opportunities enterprise-wide. This
includes sharing best practices, aligning the mission and vision of their
organizations, and leading initiatives that intentionally target eligible MSIs and
underserved communities.
Assess and increase investments in workforce readiness in K-12 settings.
The Department will develop a strategy for increasing K-12 workforce readiness
consistent with the Federal STEM Strategy, the DoD STEM Strategic Plan, and DoD
policy. Furthermore, the Department will leverage SMART in developing a
comprehensive approach to growing a diverse STEM talent pool through a continuum of
educational opportunities across the K-20 continuum. Currently, DoD engages in a
21
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
variety of STEM educational and work-experiential activities to include summer STEM
camps, project/research-based competitions, fellowships, internships/apprenticeships
teacher professional development, and curriculum development at pre-college and
postsecondary levels.
In addition to leveraging strategic plans for K-12 and K-20 programs, the Department
will engage its partners from academia, industry, not-for-profit sector, and other Federal
agencies to broaden its reach to underserved and underrepresented populations,
including military-connected students, Veterans, and military spouses. Such actions will
allow the Department to develop a holistic understanding of how its programs and
initiatives impact workforce readiness within a K-20 setting.
The Minerva Research Initiative is one example of the extended scope of K-20
workforce readiness. The Minerva Research Initiative supports social science research
aimed at improving the Department's basic understanding of security. Through this
program, DoD expands its comprehension of the social, cultural, behavioral, and
political forces that shape regions of the world. In terms of K-20 education, the Minerva
Research Initiative sponsors a program called "Science of Science," which in part
examines the access to and career trajectories of women in science. DoD seeks to
utilize programs like this to help explore where underrepresented groups encounter
obstacles in STEM careers so that policymakers develop policies that give more
equitable opportunities for all researchers.
Tracking Progress
The HBCU/MSI Program will track AI/ML project success by measuring research
advancements conducted at the Al COE and the pending contributions to the STEM
workforce. Progress will also be measured by the increase of involvement of
underserved and underrepresented communities and military-connected students.
Success and best practices will be shared through DoD member participation in the
Joint Artificial Intelligence Center Workforce Working Group.
Accountability
All of the K-12 STEM programs use demographic metrics to some extent to understand
impacts. The SMART program measures the percentage increase of HBCU/MSIs,
veterans and female scholars as semi-finalists and finalists.
Additionally, the Department will establish annual metrics to track and assess success
and trends in diversity programs. The Department will also support the Services'
strategies to recruit diverse officer candidates. DoD continues to allocate a significant
amount of resources toward recruiting, to include a focus toward minority and
underserved populations.
22
Department of Defense Equity Action Plan
