OF
+
- The Department of Justice -
Equity
Action Plan
2022
JUSTITIN
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 1
I.
Executive Summary
The Department of Justice's mission is to "enforce the law and defend the interests of the United
States according to the law; to ensure public safety against threats foreign and domestic; to
provide federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime; to seek just punishment for those
guilty of unlawful behavior; and to ensure fair and impartial administration of justice for all
Americans." As the Attorney General has explained: "Advancing equal justice under law is a
core principle of the Department of Justice. Established during Reconstruction, in the aftermath
of the Civil War, the Department's first mission was to secure the civil rights promised by the
13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments." Since then, the Department has continued its foundational
work of ensuring that no individuals are denied the freedoms and protections guaranteed by the
Constitution.
Since January 20, 2021, the Department has taken many steps to advance equity for marginalized
and underserved communities. 1 The Department has prioritized five action items to further
advance that work:
A.
leveraging federal funds provided by the Department to (a) encourage grantees to
include equity considerations in the provision of federally funded services, (b) enhance
data collection to identify and take action to address disparities in access to the
Department's programs or services based on demographic factors, and (c) better ensure
that grantees are complying with non-discrimination mandates;
B.
improving access to funding opportunities for organizations that are led by, or
primarily serve, historically marginalized and underserved populations;
C.
reducing language barriers that make it difficult for individuals with limited
English proficiency to access Department programs or activities, communicate public
safety concerns, or vindicate their rights;
D.
improving the Department's engagement with stakeholders in underserved
communities and disadvantaged groups in order to establish enduring relationships with
them and enhancing the public's awareness of the Department's expansive mission and
resources; and
E.
increasing opportunities for small businesses located in Historically Underutilized
Business Zones to secure Department contracts.
The Department believes each of these action items will substantially advance equity and civil
rights and, further, will promote public safety by increasing trust and communication between
the Department and the communities it serves.
1 Executive Order 13985 defines equity to mean "the consistent and systematic fair, just, and impartial treatment of
all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved communities that have been denied such treatment,
such as Black, Latino, and Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and
other persons of color; members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+)
persons; persons with disabilities; persons who live in rural areas; and persons otherwise adversely affected by
persistent poverty or inequality.' Sec. 2(a). EO 13985 defines underserved communities to refer to "populations
sharing a particular characteristic, as well as geographic communities, that have been systematically denied a full
opportunity to participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life, as exemplified by the list in the preceding
definition of 'equity." Sec. 2(b).
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 2
II. Summary of Early Accomplishments
Since January 20, 2021, the Department has taken several substantial actions that
"[a]ffirmatively advance[e] equity, civil rights, racial justice, and equal opportunity." Executive
Order 13985, § 1.
Combatting Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents.
The Department has taken meaningful strides to deter and respond to hate crimes and incidents.
In a May 27, 2021 memorandum ("May 27 Memorandum"), the Attorney General announced
that the Department would take certain steps that "share common objectives: deterring hate
crimes and bias-related incidents, addressing them when they occur, supporting those victimized
by them, and reducing the pernicious effects these incidents have on our society." Among other
things, the Department has assigned a Deputy Associate Attorney General as its Anti-Hate
Coordinator, who is leading the creation and coordination of the Department's anti-hate crime
and incident resources. In addition, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) designated
criminal civil rights violations, which includes hate crimes, as one of its highest-level national
threat priorities. This change will increase resources for hate crimes prevention and
investigations and makes confronting hate crimes a focus for all 56 of the FBI's field offices.
Further, the Office of Justice Programs (OJP) awarded more than $21 million to investigate and
prosecute hate crimes and assist hate crime victims, a substantial increase from previous years.
This funding will help state, local and tribal agencies and community organizations address an
alarming rise in violent and property crimes committed on the basis of race, color, national
origin, religion, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or disability. OJP's Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) and National Institute of Justice (NIJ) have conducted research that directly
informs policies and approaches to combat hate crimes and hate incidents.
Revitalizing the Community Relations Service.
The Department is revitalizing the Community Relations Service (CRS), which works with
communities in conflict to help rebuild relationships, facilitate understanding, and encourage the
development of local solutions.
Re-establishing the Office for Access to Justice:
On October 28, 2021, the Attorney General announced the re-establishment of the Office for
Access to Justice as a standalone Department component. After an extensive review, the
Attorney General issued a report identifying areas where the Department should expand its
access-to-justice functions, including "enhancing the navigability of the justice system through
technology, disability, language, and cultural access," "ensuring economic opportunity and
fairness," and "pursuing racial equity as a cornerstone of access-to-justice efforts and all
departmental work."
Ensuring Non-Discrimination in Federal Grants.
On September 15, 2021, to help ensure that federally funded programs are operating equitably,
Associate Attorney General Vanita Gupta issued a memorandum directing a review of the
Department's implementation and administrative enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 3
Act, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin in federally
funded programs, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d et seq., and the nondiscrimination provisions of the
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act (Safe Streets Act), which prohibits discrimination
on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, and sex in connection with any program or
activity funded under the statute, 34 U.S.C. § 10228(c)(1)
Expanding Language Access:
The Department has announced that it will appoint a Language Access Coordinator and has now
added information to its website about reporting hate crimes in at least ten languages, including
six of the most frequently spoken Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) languages.
Reforming Law Enforcement Practices:
As the Attorney General has stated, "[b]uilding trust and confidence between law enforcement
and the public we serve is central to our mission at the Justice Department." The Department has
announced several new policies that govern the way Department law enforcement components
engage with individuals who come into contact with the criminal justice system, including
limiting the use of chokeholds and carotid restraints to deadly force situations, generally
requiring that no-knock warrants be used only in situations where knocking and announcing
presents a threat of physical harm, and increasing the use of body-worn cameras as a tool to
increase transparency and accountability. The Department also issued interim guidance
requiring federal prosecutors to base decisions about charging, plea agreements, and advocacy at
sentencing on an individualized assessment of relevant facts, and not to reflexively rely on the
maximum punishments allowable under law. This guidance allows prosecutors to "safeguard the
public, maximize the impact of our federal resources, avoid unwarranted disparities, promote fair
outcomes in sentencing, and seek justice in every case. The Department will continue to pursue
policies that promote equitable law enforcement practices.
The Department also has used its grant-making authority to promote policing efforts that seek
collaborative engagements with the communities they serve. For example, in 2021, the
Department provided $33 million in funding to support community policing projects under its
Community Policing Development program and an additional $139 million for law enforcement
hiring to advance community policing. The Department also has sought ways to ensure that
people experiencing behavioral health crises are provided the care they need and, where
appropriate, are diverted from the criminal justice system. OJP, under its Bureau of Justice
Assistance's Justice and Mental Health Collaboration Program (JMHCP), announced the
"Connect and Protect" program to support law enforcement-behavioral health cross-system
collaboration and to improve public safety responses and outcomes for individuals with mental
illness or co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse who come into contact with the
criminal justice system.
III. Equity Action Plan
To build on these accomplishments and further advance equity for underserved and marginalized
communities, the Department plans to prioritize five action items. The majority of these actions
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 4
will cut across Department components and will thereby help promote the equitable distribution
of services from across the Department.
A. Federal Financial Assistance (Action 1)
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes:
The Department awards approximately $4 billion annually to entities engaged in a wide range of
justice-related programs, including community policing services, correctional and juvenile
justice facilities, drug and mental health courts, services for victims of crime, and law
enforcement wellness services. The Department is committed to ensuring that federal funding
programs be administered in a way that is inclusive of historically underserved and marginalized
populations and implemented in a non-discriminatory manner. Department grantmaking
programs present a significant opportunity to further equity across a broad spectrum of services
and programs.
The Department views both this action addressing federal financial assistance ("Action 1") and
the second action described below in Part III.B ("Action 2") as involving strategies for
establishing greater equity in federal financial assistance programs. Action 1 focuses on
identifying ways in which the Department can promote equity through its grantmaking
components, including what recipients of grants can do to promote greater equity in their
communities, and to strengthen the Department's enforcement of the nondiscrimination
mandates of Title VI and the Safe Streets Act. As one means of promoting equity through the
grantmaking components, Action 2 identifies ways in which the Department can increase
opportunities for entities serving communities that historically have had fewer opportunities to
access and benefit from federal financial assistance. As such, the Department anticipates that its
efforts under Actions 1 and 2 will be complementary.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier:
Department leadership will work with heads of grantmaking components, the Civil Rights
Division, and other relevant components to review program authorities and solicitations and
identify opportunities to add or expand equity considerations in application materials, review
criteria, data requests, and/or performance measures. Such equity considerations could include
identifying disparities in access to federally funded services and benefits, particularly by
historically underserved and marginalized populations, and proposing strategies to reach or serve
those populations, addressing barriers to services, and evaluating uses of funds against
demographic data. Equity considerations will be tailored to address the particular objectives of
each program and the needs of the communities being served by those programs. Action 2 in
this plan is one example of how such equity considerations may be included in the grantmaking
process.
The Department will also review upcoming solicitations and strengthen internal structures
related to compliance with Title VI and the Safe Streets Act to improve data collection,
enforcement, and information sharing between grantmaking and enforcement components.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 5
By developing a framework that seeks to enhance equity in the grantmaking process, increase
compliance with the non-discrimination mandates of civil rights statutes such as Title VI and the
Safe Streets Act, and facilitate the Department's enforcement of the laws where violations occur,
the Department can better promote the equitable and non-discriminatory use of federal funds.
In the short term, the Department will:
Review statutory authorities and upcoming solicitations, including for Fiscal Year (FY)
2022 where feasible, to identify opportunities to add equity considerations in application
materials, review criteria, data requests, and/or performance measures across programs.
Develop findings and recommendations for improved data collection and equity
performance metrics and reporting by grant recipients, including establishing criteria by
which the Department and its grant-making offices can hold themselves accountable and
measure success for improving equity through our programs. This will include, but is not
limited to, improved Title VI and Safe Streets Act data collection.
Identify ways to better educate the public, beneficiaries, and recipients of federal
financial assistance about the Department's discrimination complaint processes, and
identify additional resources, training, and staff to expand capabilities to engage in more
robust oversight, compliance reviews, and technical assistance.
Improve coordination and information-sharing capacities between Department
grantmaking and enforcement components, including referrals of potential violations of
Title VI and the Safe Streets Act.
In the longer term, the Department will:
Assess and refine equity considerations and metrics already included in, or added during
FY22 to, solicitations to determine their effectiveness in reducing disparities in access.
Identify opportunities to provide priority consideration for funding to applicants that
represent and serve historically marginalized and underserved communities or that
demonstrate a sustained effort to improve outcomes for historically marginalized and
underserved populations.
Identify a cross-section of programs to participate in a Pilot Data Collection Program
(Pilot Program) under which program-specific data requirements and/or equity
performance measures would be added to help identify disparities in access to and
delivery of services.
Identify ways to improve existing data collection platforms currently used by recipients
to report performance to the Department and help grantees build their capacity to collect
and submit data through any revised/new platform, including through training.
Build a more robust internal structure for information sharing across Department
components, as appropriate, so that grantees whose performance raise potential civil
rights compliance concerns can be provided technical assistance or referred for
compliance reviews under Title VI and the Safe Streets Act, as appropriate.
The Department prioritized this Action because it will have a significant impact given the
substantial federal funds that the Department provides. The Action will most directly impact
those demographic groups protected under Title VI and the Safe Streets Act. Because many of
the Department's grants are provided to state and local law enforcement agencies and entities
that provide services to crime victims, this action will serve the Department's twin goals of
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 6
promoting public safety and building community trust by ensuring that those agencies and
entities advance equity and non-discrimination in the provision of federally funded services.
Tracking Progress:
The Department will begin by conducting a comprehensive review of all grantmaking programs
to identify programs that already have sufficient data sets and equity measures to evaluate
promising practices to further equity, as well as programs where additional data elements or
equity performance measures may be appropriate and are permitted by statute. This will allow
the Department to establish a baseline of data against which to measure progress. The
Department will begin to incorporate additional equity considerations in the FY 2022
solicitations. The Department will also identify a cross-section of programs to participate in the
Pilot Program. In the short- to mid-term, the Department will track the success of the increased
equity measures and will evaluate the lessons learned from the Pilot Program and track its
progress by the number of such programs that are participating in the pilot and the number of
such programs that add Title VI and other civil rights data-collection requirements or equity-
performance measures.
In the longer term (5-8 years), the Department will refine the Pilot Program and seek to scale it
up where appropriate. Other indicia of success may be an increased number of programmatic
reviews that: (a) identify and remediate barriers to the delivery of programs and services or
policies that contribute to negative interactions with recipients that result in inequities among
beneficiaries; or (b) identify promising practices that can be replicated by other funding
recipients.
Accountability:
The grantmaking components, in consultation with the Civil Rights Division, will report to
Department leadership every two years, starting from the date of the publication of this report, on
how Department grant programs are furthering equity and on what optimizations have been
made to data collection efforts to track and assess compliance with civil rights requirements, as
applicable. The Department will also, where relevant, include data on equity metrics under any
existing statutory reporting obligations.
B. Improving Access to Grants (Action 2)
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes:
As a complement to Action 1, the Department will seek to leverage federal financial assistance to
advance equity by affirmatively requiring funded entities to incorporate equity principles into
their work or by tracking whether certain organizations or populations are disproportionately
favored or disfavored in the competitive award process. Grantmaking components are increasing
their focus on such efforts. For example, OJP's Office for Victims of Crime (OVC) is investing
in programming and technical assistance to both raise awareness of the availability of OVC grant
programs and expand its pool of applicants. These efforts are aimed at increasing the quality and
quantity of victim services available in marginalized and underserved communities.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 7
For Action 2, the Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) plans to advance equity by
considering ways in which certain organizations or populations are disproportionately favored or
disfavored in the competitive award process. Specifically, OVW will prioritize funding for
culturally specific, community-based organizations, as well as for technical assistance for
these programs, and will identify ways to make solicitations more welcoming and easier to
navigate for culturally specific, community-based organizations. For the purposes of this
action, culturally specific, community-based organizations are nonprofit, nongovernmental or
Tribal organizations that have as their primary purpose providing culturally relevant and
linguistically specific services and resources to cultural groups such as American Indians
(including Alaska Natives), Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders,
Blacks, or Hispanics and Latinos in the United States or U.S. territories. 42 U.S.C. § 300u-6(g).
The literature indicates that culturally specific services can have transformative effects on
individuals and their communities. For OVW-related services, advocates report that survivors are
more inclined to seek services from organizations that are familiar with their culture, language,
and background. Culturally specific, community-based organizations are more likely to
understand the complex challenges that victims from their communities face when attempting to
access services. But culturally specific service providers have too often been unable to access
substantial federal grants. The dedicated OVW programs, like the Culturally Specific Services
Program or the Tribal Sexual Assault Services Program, are small, and culturally specific and
tribal organizations often struggle to compete with larger organizations for other OVW grant
programs. As a consequence, victims who need services from a culturally specific service
provider may remain unserved or underserved.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier:
OVW will implement strategies to increase successful applications from culturally specific,
community-based organizations, including conducting targeted outreach to increase applications
from those organizations; recruiting peer reviews from those organizations; providing capacity-
building training to organizations that may be unfamiliar with the federal grantmaking process;
and identifying potentially unnecessary requirements that may function to present undue barriers
to culturally specific, community-based organizations.
Department leadership will support and elevate OVW's work to promote equity in its
administration of federal financial assistance by improving access to funding opportunities for
culturally specific, community-based organizations, and work over the next 2-6 years to review,
evaluate, and scale up those efforts across grantmaking programs. By funding a larger number of
culturally specific service providers across OVW grant programs, OVW will fund promising and
evidence-based interventions more likely to meet the needs of survivors from underserved
communities.
Tracking Progress:
In the short- to mid-term, OVW will implement this approach and track whether the percentage
of applications from, and the percentage of grants awarded to, culturally specific, community-
based organizations increases. In the longer term, the Department will evaluate the outcomes of
the OVW program and develop improved outreach and funding opportunities for other federal
grant programs.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 8
Accountability:
OVW anticipates including a summary of its progress toward broadening its reach to culturally
specific, community-based organizations in its FY 2022 report to Congress on discretionary
grant programs (34 U.S.C. § 10238), as well as any future reports to Congress similar to the
report submitted by OVW for FYs 2020 and 2021-in response to requests from the House
Committee on Appropriations-on grants to community-based organizations to provide
culturally specific services.
C.
Language Access (Action 3)
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes:
Timely and accurate communication with the public is essential to the Department's mission to
ensure public safety, provide federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime, and promote
the fair and impartial administration of justice. Yet language barriers often prevent many
communities from understanding their rights, reporting crimes, or otherwise having full and
equal access to the Department's services and resources. The Department is focused on
improving language access to receive complaints and otherwise engage with the approximately
25.6 million individuals with limited English proficiency (LEP) and on increasing this
underserved and often vulnerable population's knowledge of and access to Departmental
programs and its efforts to, for example, combat hate crimes, seek environmental justice, and
prevent discrimination. The Department needs consistent and widely available language access
education and training materials and the establishment of a centralized place for resources to
improve its communication with LEP individuals.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier:
On May 27, 2021, the Attorney General committed to establishing a full-time, permanent
Language Access Coordinator to increase the Department's language access capabilities. The
Language Access Coordinator will centralize and expand language access resources and promote
language access directives across the Department; improve awareness by staff of the
Department's telephonic language service and other language contracts that may be used by all
components and staff; and work with components with constituencies with particularly high
language access needs, such as the Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) and the
Bureau of Prisons (BOP), to provide assistance to the component in making its programs more
language accessible.
The Coordinator, working with Department components, also will be responsible for overseeing
the creation of:
a one-stop shop for Department components to obtain interpreters or translations,
including an inventory of internal resources such as existing translation and interpretation
contracts;
an intra-agency working group on language access, with representatives from
components that most commonly interact with the public, to ensure a whole-of-
Department approach to providing language assistance;
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 9
an internal repository of commonly translated documents;
a Department-wide translation glossary of common legal terms in the top languages
spoken by LEP individuals;
standard language assistance notices, flyers, and posters for the Department's
components to use;
template web pages or web standards to help components post translated content for LEP
communities;
guidance on identifying documents for translation and targeting languages for translation;
translations of the Department's most common publicly accessed webpages into Spanish
(and will consider translation into additional common languages of LEP individuals in
the United States or in the relevant geographic region or in the relevant subject matter
audience); and
guidance and technical assistance for United States Attorney's Offices and other
components, as appropriate, on their ongoing language access needs.
The Department prioritized these actions to help ensure that language access is not a barrier to
LEP individuals participating in key Department priorities. By creating language accessible
materials, and providing Department staff with easy access to and knowledge of those resources,
we expect that we will be able to substantially increase language accessible services.
Tracking Progress:
In the next year, the Department will hire the Language Access Coordinator. In the short- to mid-
term, the Department's progress will be tracked by the restoration of a departmental language
access working group; the creation of a centralized repository of materials; and an evaluation of
whether components need to create or update their language access plans. The Department will
also seek to increase the number of calls providing interpretation to LEP individuals through
telephone interpretation vendor(s). The Department will increase LEP community members'
knowledge about federal hate crimes, hate incidents, anti-discrimination laws, and ways to report
violations to the Department. In particular, the Department will pilot a new training, called
United Against Hate, in three United States Attorney's Offices and will present the training to
community stakeholders, including organizations serving LEP communities. Evaluations given
after the training may provide data regarding increased knowledge about hate crimes, hate
incidents, and how to report violations, and will assist the Department refine the training
program. The Department anticipates that in the short- to mid-term it will expand the training to
more districts.
The Department will also identify a cross-section of public-facing content that is most relevant
for LEP users and will expand the use of professional translations of that content, in terms of
number of translations and/or the diversity of languages into which content is translated. The
Department will work to improve access to that content and will track progress by the number of
views of those pages and other available analytic metrics, as appropriate. The Department will
expand the use of the intranet and other internal tools for staff to understand how to access
translation and interpretation services and will measure progress in part by tracking usage of the
Department's telephonic interpretation contract. The Department will also encourage staff to
provide feedback on the quality and timeliness of telephonic interpretation, as appropriate.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 10
In the longer term, Department staff will demonstrate that they know how to access language
services and are effectively communicating the existence of those services to the public. In
addition, the Department will seek to increase translations of other essential public-facing online
pages and tools, and to increase the number of page views of that content.
Accountability:
The Language Access Coordinator will be evaluated based on success related to these objectives.
In addition, components will publish language access plans, including resources available for
translation and interpretation services, so that they are accessible to the public in different
languages. This action should also be implemented to be consistent with EO 13166, Improving
Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency, 65 Fed. Reg. 50,121 (Aug. 16,
2000), and the Department's Language Access Plan (March 2012).
D. Stakeholder Engagement (Action 4)
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes:
Effective stakeholder engagement is a critical aspect of ensuring that communities have equitable
access to, and benefit from, all Department work and services. It also ensures that Department
work is community-centered, and it helps to mitigate against key barriers that can prevent
stakeholders from accessing relevant Department programs and services, including lack of
knowledge about the Department's programs and activities, difficulties identifying relevant
Department resources, lack of language accessibility or cultural awareness, and lack of trust.
Consistent stakeholder engagement will help improve the Department's understanding of the
needs and perspectives of the many diverse communities it serves and establish enduring lines of
communication between the Department and traditionally underserved communities. Among
other things, such engagement will help to improve witness cooperation and participation in the
justice process, ensure appropriate consideration of the needs of victims, improve police-
community relationships, increase reporting of potential violations of law and hate incidents, and
improve the dissemination of important information, resources, programs and services.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier:
The Department seeks to improve components' understanding of the interests, needs, and
perspectives of marginalized and underserved communities; to increase public confidence and
trust in the Department; to strengthen relationships with marginalized and underserved
communities; to inform the Department's work; and to promote greater understanding of the
Department's programs and services among the public, particularly marginalized and
underserved communities, by engaging with relevant stakeholders more often and more
meaningfully.
To this end, the Department will provide support for components as they enhance stakeholder
engagement to address the needs of marginalized and historically underserved populations by:
enhancing messaging and accessibility of information around the work, programs, and
services of Department components and their value to the public;
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 11
collaborating with components, including U.S. Attorney's Offices, and the Department's
Performance Improvement Officer to develop and support stakeholder engagement
measures that focus on equity;
serving as a resource for best practices and training on stakeholder engagement with
marginalized and historically underserved populations;
developing evidence-based approaches and materials so that Department programs,
initiatives, and messaging advance an equitable approach for historically underserved and
marginalized communities, are culturally accessible, and reduce stigma and bias by using
inclusive and person-first approaches and language;
maintaining contact lists of stakeholder organizations that represent and are led by
underserved and historically marginalized populations that are hyper-local, local, and
regional; and
conducting ongoing listening sessions with those stakeholders to better understand their
concerns and perspectives and help the Department make policy recommendations that
are responsive to the needs of these communities.
The Department expects that these efforts will improve relationships and trust with law
enforcement and will enhance the Department's effectiveness. In the short-term, the Department
will identify components, such as the U.S. Attorney's Offices and the Community Relations
Service, for which building community-based strategies and strong collaborations with local law
enforcement and communities are particularly important. The Department will centralize, create,
and develop resources such as trainings and toolkits to help those components engage with and
build trust-based relationships with stakeholders, particularly those communities affected by hate
crimes and those that have expressed distrust in law enforcement.
Tracking Progress:
In the next year, the Department will dedicate resources to serve as a focal point for the
Department's work to increase the Department's stakeholder engagement capabilities, expand
DOJ's stakeholder engagement resources, promote stakeholder engagement plans across the
Department, and collaborate with the Department's Language Access Coordinator to fully
integrate language access needs into stakeholder engagement efforts as they relate to
marginalized and historically underserved populations.
By June 1, 2022, each component will develop an initial list of stakeholder organizations that
represent and are led by underserved and historically marginalized populations within the region
their office serves, or focused on the legal subject-matter of the component, with whom it should
be engaging and working to build long-term relationships.
In addition, in the short- to mid-term, the Department will develop an internal plan for enhancing
its stakeholder engagement with marginalized and historically underserved populations, which
may include developing methods for conducting surveys to evaluate the existence and
effectiveness of stakeholder engagement practices, resources, and needs; promoting individual
component-led stakeholder engagement plans; developing training, guidance, or toolkits on
stakeholder engagement for components; and developing short-term and long-term performance
measures on the improvement of stakeholder engagement that is accessible and culturally and
linguistically competent.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 12
In the mid- to long-term, the Department will create a plan to measure and expand stakeholder
engagement activities with underserved and historically marginalized populations; and develop
methods to track and measurably increase alliances (which can include, among other things,
working groups, task forces, or district alliances against hate as described in the May 27
Memorandum) among the Department, local and state law enforcement, and community
members, to promote community engagement and the Department's responsiveness to
community needs. Success will be tracked by increased number of relevant stakeholder
engagement events and alliances.
Accountability:
Accountability measures will include tracking of periodic responses to surveys that will evaluate
relevant stakeholder engagement efforts for the prior fiscal year.
E.
Procurement and Contracting (Action 5)
Barrier to Equitable Outcome:
Each fiscal year, the Department obligates approximately $8.5 billion in contracts to support its
many missions. In each of the last three fiscal years, the Department has obligated more than
$2.5 billion to American small businesses, including small disadvantaged businesses (SDB),
woman-owned small businesses (WOSB), service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses
(SDVOSB), and small firms located in distressed and rural areas of the country, which are
known as Historically Underutilized Business Zones or HUBZones.² The Department has a long
history of supporting American small businesses and the small business procurement programs
associated with the respective categories. This history of support stems from the Department's
commitment to the objectives of the Small Business Act to enhance the nation's industrial base
and provide opportunities to small businesses in our contracting efforts. The Department's
history of support for small businesses also stems from the clear recognition that small
businesses, including SDBs, WOSBs, SDVOSBs, and HUBZone firms, often provide the best
solution and best pricing to meet our critical mission needs.
In recent years, the Department has met or exceeded its goals for small businesses and the
statutory goals for contracting with SDBs, WOSBs, and SDVOSBs. The Department has a
statutory goal of awarding at least 3% of federal contract dollars to HUBZone-certified
companies each year. While the Department has made progress toward this goal, it has not yet
met this goal. HUBZone firms have had relatively few contracting opportunities to pursue work
at the Department. As a result, disadvantaged and HUBZone firms have been underrepresented
in the Department's contracts.
2 To qualify as a HUBZone small business, a firm must be certified by the U.S. Small Business Administration and
meet the following criteria: (1) it is a small business defined by the SBA's size standards; (2) it is organized for
profit; (3) it is at least 51 percent owned and controlled by U.S. citizens, a Community Development Corporation, an
agricultural cooperative, an Alaska Native corporation, a Native Hawaiian organization, or an Indian tribe; (4) it has
its principal office located in a HUBZone; and (5) at least 35 percent of its employees live in a HUBZone.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 13985 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Page 13
The Department sees an opportunity to improve equity by working to identify contracting
opportunities that may be competed exclusively among disadvantaged businesses located in
HUBZone communities.
Action and Intended Impact on the Barrier:
The Department will prioritize increasing opportunities for HUBZone small businesses to all
employees who have a role in defining Department contracting requirements and executing and
managing Department contracts. By focusing on increasing opportunities for HUBZone firms,
the Department will increase the flow of dollars to these disadvantaged areas, which will have a
significant economic benefit for the businesses and residents in these historically marginalized
and underserved communities.
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) will leader this initiative
and will enlist the help of acquisition and program leadership in the Department's major
procuring bureaus.
Tracking Progress:
The Department will use the following short-term and long-term actions to determine whether it
has eliminated or substantially reduced the barrier. In the short- to mid-term, Department
leadership will ask each of its major procuring bureaus to identify at least two contracting
opportunities for HUBZone small businesses each fiscal year for 4 years, or until the statutory
goal of 3% is met, and to compete those contracts exclusively among HUBZone firms. Progress
will be measured when specific contracting opportunities are identified for HUBZone firms and
when those contracts are awarded to HUBZone firms. The long-term goal of this work is to
increase the percentage of the Department's contracting dollars awarded to HUBZone firms and
to meet or exceed the statutory goal of awarding at least 3% of its contracting dollars to
HUBZone firms.
Accountability:
At least quarterly throughout the fiscal year, OSDBU will share small business progress reports
with internal stakeholders to track dollars obligated to small, disadvantaged HUBZone firms.
