FISCAL YEAR 2023
EVALUATION PLAN
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
3
Overview of Strategic Goals and Objectives
4
PLANNED EVALUATIONS FOR FY 2023
6
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA)
6
Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
8
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
11
U.S. Department of Transportation
i
INTRODUCTION
The mission of the U.S. Department of Transportation is to deliver the world's leading transportation system,
serving the American people and economy through the safe, efficient, sustainable, and equitable movement of
people and goods.
In accordance with the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act, Public Law No.
115-435), the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT OR the Department) is pleased to present the Fiscal Year
(FY) 2023 Evaluation Plan. This plan describes the significant evaluation activities that are planned to occur in FY
2023. It includes the key questions for each significant evaluation study and the associated information collections.
It also outlines the Department's criteria for designating evaluations as "significant.'
In addition to the evaluations described in this document, DOT intends to undertake additional evidence and
evaluation projects going forward that will support the FY 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan. The recent passage of the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) also presents new opportunities to explore the effectiveness of programs and
activities. For example, the Department has committed to incorporating evidence and evaluation work into the
delivery of grant programs with a budget exceeding $1 billion. DOT will update its Evaluation Plan as it progresses in
the implementation of BIL programs and ensure that it aligns with the Strategic Plan.
As required by OMB Memorandum M-19-23, in developing a definition of significance, the Department considered
factors such as:
The importance of a program or funding stream to the Department's mission;
The size of the program in terms of funding or population(s) served; and
The extent to which the study would fill an important knowledge gap about the program, population(s) served,
or the issue(s) the program was designed to address.
DOT designates an evaluation as significant based on two criteria: the evaluation met the definition of a program
evaluation as stated in the Evidence Act, and the evaluation has proposed funding in the FY 2023 budget request.ยน
This plan was created by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Budget and Programs (OST-B). OST-B sought
input from the Department-wide Performance Improvement Community and Evidence and Evaluation Working
Group, in collaboration with the Office of the Chief Financial Officer from each Operating Administration. The
Performance Improvement Community represents performance contacts from all Operating Administrations,
designed to advance the Department's holistic use of evidence in decision-making. The Evidence and Evaluation
Working Group is a working group of the Performance Improvement Community, comprised of subject matter expert
representation from all Operating Administrations and the Office of the Secretary, in the areas of program evaluation,
performance measurement, policy analysis, and research. This working group supports the Department in meeting
all requirements under Title I of the Evidence Act, contributes to the maturation of the Department's capabilities
in these areas, and fosters a culture of continuous learning and improvement through stakeholder engagement and
education.
OST-B is in the process of establishing more formal governance structures around conducting evaluations
Department-wide, including the development and publication of the DOT Evaluation Policy as required by the
Evidence Act. As the Department's capacity for evidence building matures, OST-B plans to provide additional
guidance and resources for Operating Administrations around how to conduct evaluations and use the findings to
inform programmatic and policy decisions.
1 The Evidence Act defines program evaluation as "an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of one or more programs,
policies, and organizations intended to assess their effectiveness and efficiency."
1
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Organizational Structure
Congress established DOT in 1967, consolidating 31 transportation agencies and functions under the first U.S.
Secretary of Transportation, Alan S. Boyd. Approximately 54,000 DOT employees continue to bring innovations and
integrity to the work of improving the safety and performance of our multi-modal transportation system. Leadership
of the Department is provided by the Secretary of Transportation, who is the principal advisor to the President in
all matters relating to Federal transportation programs. The Office of the Secretary (OST) oversees nine Operating
Administrations, each with its own management and organizational structure.
F
Federal Aviation
Federal Highway
Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FAA)
Administration (FHWA)
Administration (FMCSA)
Federal Railroad
Federal Transit
Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway
Administration (FRA)
Administration (FTA)
Development Corporation (GLS)
Maritime Administration
National Highway Traffic
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
(MARAD)
Safety Administration
Safety Administration (PHMSA)
(NHTSA)
Overview of Strategic Goals and Objectives
The FY 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan identifies six strategic goals, which are outcome-oriented, long-term goals for the
major functions and operations of DOT. Each strategic goal has associated strategic objectives, which express more
specifically the impact DOT is trying to achieve. The Department also establishes numerous performance goals that
define what success looks like for each strategic objective, many of which support the transformational initiatives
made possible by the IIJA. The graphic on the following page presents DOT's strategic goals and strategic objectives
for FY 2022 - 2026.
U.S. Department of Transportation
2
STRATEGIC GOALS
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
1.1
SAFE PUBLIC
1.2
SAFE WORKERS
SAFETY
1.3
SAFE DESIGN
1.4
SAFE SYSTEMS
1.5
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CYBERSECURITY
2.1
JOB CREATION AND FISCAL HEALTH
ECONOMIC
2.2
HIGH-PERFORMING CORE ASSETS
STRENGTH
2.3
GLOBAL ECONOMIC LEADERSHIP
AND GLOBAL
COMPETITIVENESS
2.4
RESILIENT SUPPLY CHAINS
2.5
SYSTEM RELIABILITY AND CONNECTIVITY
3.1
EXPANDING ACCESS
3.2
WEALTH CREATION
EQUITY
3.3
POWER OF COMMUNITY
3.4
PROACTIVE INTERVENTION, PLANNING, AND CAPACITY BUILDING
4.1
PATH TO ECONOMY-WIDE NET-ZERO EMISSIONS BY 2050
CLIMATE AND
4.2
INFRASTRUCTURE RESILIENCE
SUSTAINABILITY
4.3
CLIMATE JUSTICE AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
5.1
MATCHING RESEARCH AND POLICY TO ADVANCE BREAKTHROUGHS
5
5.2
EXPERIMENTATION
TRANSFORMATION
5.3
COLLABORATION AND COMPETITIVENESS
5.4
FLEXIBILITY AND ADAPTABILITY
6.1
CUSTOMER SERVICE
6.2
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
ORGANIZATIONAL
6.3
DATA-DRIVEN PROGRAMS AND POLICIES
EXCELLENCE
6.4
OVERSIGHT, PERFORMANCE, AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
6.5
SUSTAINABILITY INITIATIVES
6.6
ENTERPRISE CYBER RISKS
3
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
PLANNED EVALUATIONS FOR FY 2023
The FY 2023 Evaluation Plan includes three significant evaluations from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) and the Federal Transit Administration (FTA). While DOT recognizes the breadth of
assessment and analysis activities occurring across the Department, they do not currently meet the definition of
significance as defined above. In future years, the Department hopes to broaden the scope of its Annual Evaluation
Plan to include more Operating Administrations and OST offices.
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA)
Electronic Logging Device Rule - Regulatory Effectiveness Review
The electronic logging device (ELD) rule is intended to help create a safer work
environment for drivers, and make it easier and faster to accurately track, manage,
and share records of duty status data. An ELD synchronizes with a vehicle engine to
Overview
automatically record driving time for easier, more accurate hours of service recording.
FMCSA plans to begin this evaluation in FY 2023 and conclude in FY 2024. The
evaluation will be performed by FMCSA's Office of Policy with contractor support and
two or three subject matter experts (SMEs) from the Office of Compliance.
Were the intended safety outcomes of the ELD rule achieved?
Evaluation
Question
The final evaluation objectives and related questions will be identified during the
planning/implementation phase of the evaluation.
Safety risk data from Motor Carrier Management Information System, Safety
Information
Measurement System, and Fatality Analysis Reporting System to gather data on
Needed
carrier investigations, roadside inspections, carrier, and driver performance. Additional
information will be collected from SMEs and industry.
FMCSA will perform qualitative and quantitative analysis by collecting historical
Methods
and trend data from existing data systems. FMCSA will conduct pre- and post-ELD
implementation analysis and conduct surveys and interviews to collect SME and
industry information.
Anticipated
FMCSA does not anticipate any challenges associated with this evaluation.
Challenges
The final report will be issued internally containing Findings and Recommendations
to guide FMCSA decision-making. FMCSA will develop and implement corrective
Dissemination
actions to the recommendations. Corrective actions could include but are not limited to
changing rules, policies, and/or implementing training.
U.S. Department of Transportation
4
Effectiveness of the Drug and Alcohol Clearinghouse Rule Data Reporting and Use
FMCSA established the Commercial Driver's License Drug and Alcohol Clearinghouse
(Clearinghouse) through a recent rulemaking. This new database contains information
pertaining to violations of the DOT controlled substances (drug) and alcohol testing
program for holders of commercial driver's licenses (CDLs). The Clearinghouse
provides FMCSA and employers the necessary tools to identify drivers who
are prohibited from operating a CMV based on DOT drug and alcohol program
Overview
violations and ensure that such drivers receive the required evaluation and treatment
before operating a commercial motor vehicle (CMV) on public roads. An outcome
evaluation will be performed four years after the Clearinghouse has been operational
to understand its effectiveness, best practices, and opportunities for improvement.
FMCSA plans to begin this evaluation in FY 2023 and conclude in FY 2024. The
evaluation will be performed by FMCSA's Office of Policy with contractor support and
two or three SMEs from the Office of Compliance.
Evaluation
Is the Drug and Alcohol Clearinghouse being used as intended by the regulation?
Questions
Is industry complying with data reporting and use requirements?
Information
Data and information will be collected from the Clearinghouse, other systems (to be
Needed
identified), interviews, and surveys.
Methods
FMCSA will perform qualitative and quantitative analyses that will be identified during
the initial phase of the evaluation to identify specific data and information requirements.
Anticipated
Accessing the timely receipt of driver data located in systems outside FMCSA's control.
Challenges
The final report will be issued internally containing Findings and Recommendations
to guide FMCSA decision-making. FMCSA will develop and implement corrective
Dissemination
actions to the recommendations. Corrective actions could include but are not limited to
changing rules, policies, and/or implementing training.
5
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
Transit Asset Management Program Evaluation
Transit asset management (TAM) is a business model that prioritizes funding based
on the condition of transit assets to achieve and maintain a state of good repair (SGR)
for the nation's public transportation assets. In accordance with the Moving Ahead
for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21), the 2016 TAM final rule developed a
framework for transit agencies to monitor and manage public transportation assets,
improve safety, increase reliability and performance, and establish performance
measures in order to help agencies keep their systems operating smoothly and
efficiently. The regulations apply to all transit providers that are recipients or sub-
recipients of federal financial assistance under 49 U.S. Code Chapter 53 and who own,
operate, or manage transit capital assets used in the provision of public transportation.
Transit agencies are required to develop TAM plans and submit their performance
measures and targets to the National Transit Database on a regular basis.
In 2019, FTA began a multi-year evaluation of the TAM program and associated TAM
rule, which will be completed in FY 2023. To date, FTA and its partners at the John
A. Volpe National Transportation Systems Center are evaluating the program in three
dimensions:
Overview
Policy Change: Changes to Federal Policy and FTA grantmaking introduced
or required by the TAM Rule, MAP-21, and the Fixing America's Surface
Transportation Act, as well as related guidance development, communications,
and outreach. Related findings often discuss changes within FTA, the way it
interacts with grantees, and the ability of the rule to be implemented by transit
agencies.
Organizational Change: Updates to the organizational structure or organizational
functioning of transit agencies, following either the TAM plan requirement or
a move toward a TAM approach. Related findings include changes in agency
processes, staffing structures, and outcomes of the asset management process.
Industry Change: The intermediate- to long-term change in practice in the
transit industry and at transit agencies to reflect a broad focus on improved asset
management. Related findings include how agencies utilize data for decision
making and the effects of uncertain funding on maintenance, operations, and
capital spending.
Policy Change
Has the FTA final rule been an effective regulatory action in terms of the
regulatory goals to advance performance management and TAM?
Are there updates to the regulation would more effectively meet the goals of
advancing performance management and TAM practices?
Evaluation
Have FTA's communications, guidance, and support effectively addressed the
Questions
challenges faced by transit agencies and grantees in the implementation of the
TAM final rule?
Do Tier 2 agencies benefited from developing the additional TAM plan elements,
such that the potential economic benefit or cost savings outweigh the time and
cost burden of developing those elements?
Have transit agencies faced a higher-than-expected increase in the number of
compliance findings or reviews as a result of the TAM plan requirement?
U.S. Department of Transportation
6
Organizational Change
Has the TAM final rule led to an overall move toward a comprehensive TAM culture
within agency organizations throughout the transit industry?
Have agency efforts to implement the TAM requirements led to changes in
organizational structure or key functions? If yes, to what extent?
Have the changes in organizational structure resulted in intended improvements
to agency business processes, in terms of internal coordination, interagency
collaboration, hiring, or other practices?
Evaluation
Industry Change
Questions
Has the implementation of the TAM requirements improved SGR of the nation's
transit systems?
Has the SGR backlog nationwide been reduced as a result of the requirements?
Has the TAM plan and performance management requirements improved overall
outcomes for the transportation system, including safety, service reliability,
operations and maintenance costs, and system performance?
Have agency efforts to implement the TAM requirements led to overall cost savings,
economic improvement, or reduced taxpayer costs for transit operations?
Since FY 2019, FTA has collected information from agency interview responses, FTA
Information
TAM Points of Contact survey responses, FTA TAM Points of Contact focus group
Needed
responses, agency asset inventories, agency narrative reports, agency credit reports,
media tweets, program engagement data, and national peer exchange event registration
data. Quantitative and qualitative data collection will conclude in FY 2022.
FTA and the evaluation team are conducting the following evaluation activities:
Agency interviews and focus groups: Interviewing agencies representing a range
of FTA regions and agency types and holding focus groups with regional Points of
Contact to collect qualitative data relevant to the evaluation questions.
Analysis of agency-reported asset inventory data from the National Transit
Database (NTD): Analyzing data that agencies are required to submit on their
assets and the SGR of their systems to the NTD each year. The data cover four
asset categories: revenue vehicles, service vehicles, facilities, and infrastructure.
Also included are quantitative targets agencies set for performance measures, and
information on agency finances.
Methods
Review of NTD Narrative Reports: The TAM Rule requires transit agencies to
submit data on their assets and asset management process to the NTD, including
qualitative descriptions of the asset management process. The evaluation team
is conducting a content analysis of a representative sample of narrative reports to
analyze trends across asset category and agency types.
Review of agency credit reports: Analyzing agency credit ratings from Moody's
Investors Service to identify connections between an agency's SGR and its
financial health.
Review of social media mentions of TAM-related topics: Using a Python script
to scrape the Twitter feeds of transit-related media groups and general news
organizations for tweets pertaining to transit. Feeding the data into a statistical
computing software to analyze for TAM-related terms.
7
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Quarterly data collection: Analyzing data that the TAM program collects quarterly
on outreach activities and engagement with agencies. The data contribute to the
overall program evaluation by documenting changes in agency engagement with
FTA's TAM Program over time, as well as topics of interest for agencies.
Methods
Analysis of roundtable registration data on agency competency in TAM: The TAM
program hosts annual roundtable events to connect recipient agencies, present
information on TAM topics, and facilitate learning about the state of the practice.
Registration for the event includes providing information related to agency staff
and experience with TAM practices. The evaluation team is collecting and coding
data from registrations to find emerging themes.
The TAM program applies to a wide variety of organizations, from large multimodal
transit systems with significant assets to small rural transit systems and Tribal transit
operators. FTA has sought data from a cross-section of stakeholders to ensure that
different types of stakeholders are represented in the responses.
Anticipated
Challenges
The evaluation team expects that most of its future findings will reflect not only the
impacts of the TAM program, but also potentially the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on agencies and on industry-wide SGR. These impacts may be difficult to
isolate, and future evaluation efforts may need to be tailored to attempt to distinguish
between changes pre- and post-pandemic.
The findings of the evaluation will be submitted in a report to the program managers,
Dissemination
who will then develop strategies for program improvement based on the results. A high-
level summary of the findings will also be published on the TAM website.
U.S. Department of Transportation
8
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
CDL
Commercial driver's license
CMV
Commercial motor vehicle
DOT
Department of Transportation
ELD
Electronic logging device
FMCSA
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
FTA
Federal Transit Administration
FY
Fiscal year
MAP-21
Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act
NTD
National Transit Database
SGR
State of good repair
SME
Subject matter expert
TAM
Transit Asset Management
TIFIA
Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act
VAM
Vessel Acquisition Manager
U.S. Department of Transportation
9
2
U.S. Department
of Transportation
1200 New Jersey Ave SE
Washington, D.C. 20590
