U.S. Department
of Transportation
le
6
Equity Action Plan
January 2022
A MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY
From the construction of the transcontinental railroad to the Montgomery Bus Boycott, transportation has
always been inseparable from America's struggle for racial and economic justice. At its best, transportation
can be a powerful engine of opportunity, connecting people to jobs, education, and resources-whether
they live in a big city, a rural community, or anywhere in between. Ensuring equity and accessibility for every
member of the traveling public is one of the Department of Transportation's highest priorities.
As we continue to advance this work, it's important to recognize that past federal transportation investments
have too often failed to address inequities, or even made them worse. And because a piece of physical
infrastructure endures for decades, families and communities today must contend with the results of
discriminatory choices that may date back generations. For example, highways routed directly through
Black and brown neighborhoods, often in an effort to divide and destroy them, continue to affect the well-
being of the residents who remain. In other cases, we see inequities in our failures to invest, as with transit
deserts that leave out the communities that most need affordable transportation options, or contracting
opportunities for transportation projects that fail to engage and utilize women and people of color.
The Department - and the entire Biden-Harris Administration - are committed to doing the right thing for
our shared future, addressing these inequities, and building a better, more equitable transportation system.
On his first day in office, President Biden signed Executive Order 13985, establishing a whole-of-government
approach to advancing equity and opportunity. In the year since, this Department has worked hard to
implement that order. We've stepped up our efforts to engage with underserved communities, to enforce key
provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and to rebuild our Departmental Office of Civil Rights, ensuring that
equity is considered as a key factor in every program we administer and every policy we set.
We've also made clear how equity and civil rights compliance belong in our discretionary grant programs,
consistent with the law, acting to ensure that federal dollars are available to support projects that will tangibly
benefit underserved and overburdened communities. We are strengthening our Disadvantaged Business
Enterprise Program, to ensure that business opportunities in transportation and infrastructure reach women-
and minority-owned small businesses. And we've begun working to implement the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law, which provides for historic investments in transportation equity.
This Equity Action Plan is a major milestone for the Department of Transportation that represents a shift in
how we view and deliver transportation programs. We have a long way to go toward creating a truly equitable
transportation system. But the actions outlined in this plan form a strong foundation, and | encourage the
public to hold us accountable as we work to meet these goals.
Done right, transportation policy can help level the playing field. It can transform economies, connect
people to opportunity, and empower underserved communities to build generational wealth for the future.
In partnership with community leaders, state and local governments, and the traveling public, we at the
Department of Transportation look forward to continuing this vital work.
635
Secretary Pete Buttigieg
1
Executive Summary
The U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT or Department) is
committed to pursuing a comprehensive approach to advancing
equity for all. In response to Executive Order 13985: Advancing Racial
Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government, this Equity Action Plan highlights key actions
that USDOT will undertake to expand access and opportunity to all
communities while focusing on underserved, overburdened, and
disadvantaged communities. The actions described here fall under four
focus areas - wealth creation, power of community, interventions, and
expanding access. Actions include providing technical assistance to
small disadvantaged businesses, reinvigorating USDOT's programmatic
enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, launching a national
technical assistance center, and developing a national transportation
cost burden measure. These actions were developed through an
intensive effort, combining knowledge, experience, viewpoints, and data
from the public, experts, and USDOT staff.
$
Wealth Creation
Power of Community
Interventions
Expanding Access
Led by the Equity Leadership Team, a group of 30+ senior leaders from
across the Department, and supported by a task force with over 160
civil servants, USDOT has already taken important steps to address
historic inequities in the transportation system, but more needs to
be done. The actions outlined in this plan represent the next steps of
USDOT's efforts to advance equity and fulfill the mission of USDOT.
2
Developing the Vision
USDOT'S EQUITY FOCUS AREAS
CONFERENCE
INTERNAL
REQUEST FOR
Using a variety of sources and
ON ADVANCING
EQUITY
INFORMATION
TRANSPORTATION
LEADERSHIP
activities, the Department
EQUITY
TEAM & TASK
LITERATURE
identified four equity focus areas
FORCE INPUT
REVIEWS
to guide its equity advancement
activities. The focus areas - wealth
creation, power of community,
CONSULTATIONS
LISTENING
interventions, and expanding
WITH EQUITY
SESSIONS
access - are designed to place
EXPERTS
people and communities at the
center of USDOT's equity efforts.
DATA-DRIVEN
USDOT is using these focus areas
EQUITY
to develop concrete actions
ASSESSMENTS
that will thoughtfully redress
historic inequities, positively
impact historically underserved
or overburdened communities in
meaningful ways, and ensure that
the Department is equipped to
equitably deliver its resources and
benefits. Initial sets of actions for
each focus area are highlighted in
this document.
HIGHLIGHTED EQUITY ACTIONS
WEALTH CREATION
POWER OF COMMUNITY
By providing technical assistance to small
Reinvigorating USDOT's programmatic
disadvantaged businesses, USDOT will help
enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act,
increase their understanding of how to navigate
including re-emphasizing agency review of the
the USDOT contracting process, gain awareness
potential discriminatory impact of grantees'
of upcoming contract opportunities, and enhance
proposed activities before awarding federal
their core competencies and skills-enabling
funds-as opposed to waiting until a project is
them to more effectively compete for USDOT
delivered to enforce civil rights protections-wil
contracting opportunities and build wealth.
prevent disparate impacts on protected classes
and empower communities in transportation
INTERVENTIONS
decision-making.
By launching a national technical assistance
EXPANDING ACCESS
center, USDOT will provide direct, hands-on
technical support with local impact-providing
By developing a national transportation
targeted assistance in areas of planning,
cost burden measure, USDOT will have a
project development, grant applications, and
critical tool to address barriers to accessing
project delivery to ensure that transportation
affordable transportation options that have
investments and benefits support underserved and
consequences on economic mobility-and help
overburdened communities.
bring measurable transportation benefits to
disadvantaged communities per Justice40.
3
Setting the Foundation for Equity
In order to achieve the Administration's ambitious
human resources, procurement, and small business.
equity goals and implement Executive Order 13985:
EQTF members have worked across nine
Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved
workstreams that are directly responsible for
Communities Through the Federal Government, the
implementing the Department's work under
Secretary has mobilized top officials from across the
Executive Order 13985. Gender and disability justice
Department to lead equity advancement in USDOT
efforts are also integrated into workstream activities,
programs and policies.
including the advancement of Executive Order 13988:
First, the Secretary has convened an Equity
Preventing and Combating Discrimination on the
Leadership Team (EQLT), which is made up of 30+
Basis of Gender Identity or Sexual Orientation. In
senior agency officials from across the Secretarial
addition, the workstreams address environmental
Offices and the Operating Administrations. These
justice efforts as part of the Justice40 initiative, which
officials lead the Equity Task Force (EQTF), which is
aims to deliver 40 percent of the overall benefits
composed of over 160 senior level management
of relevant federal investments to disadvantaged
and program area staff who are well-versed in
communities. Each workstream is led by one or more
topical areas such as civil rights, environmental
EQLT members. This structure will adapt as needed
justice, climate justice, research and development,
to advance the Department's equity objectives.
EQUITY
LEADERSHIP
TEAM
30+ senior leaders from
CHRISTOPHER COES
IRENE MARION
ROBERT HAMPSHIRE
across the Department
Principal Deputy Assistant
Director, Departmental Office
Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Secretary for Transportation Policy
of Civil Rights
Research & Technology
ROBIN HUTCHESON
PHILIP MCNAMARA
SHELBY SCALES
VICTORIA WASSMER
Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Assistant Secretary for
Director of the Office of Small &
Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Safety Policy
Administration
Disadvantaged Business Utilization
Finance & Budget
GENDER
ECONOMIC
JUSTICE40
MOBILITY
WORKFORCE
JUSTICE
JUSTICE
JUSTICE
EQUITY
TECHNOLOGY
INTERAGENCY,
BUDGET
DATA &
&
STAKEHOLDER,
ASSESSMENT
INNOVATION
& PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT
FOUNDATIONAL PROCESS WORKSTREAMS
IMPACT AREA WORKSTREAMS
4
Support and facilitate change in the impact areas.
Direct connection to desired equity outcomes.
Recent Accomplishments
FEBRUARY
Introduced racial equity and barriers to opportunity as a consideration for awarding
2021
discretionary grants
MARCH
Established the Equity Leadership Team & the Equity Task Force to lead the
2021
Department's equity efforts
MARCH
Consulted with Federally Recognized Tribes on updates to USDOT Tribal Policy &
2021
Consultation Plan
MAY
Published a Request for Information asking the public for comments about
2021
transportation equity
JUNE
Proposed that equity be included as one of the Department's fiscal year (FY)
2021
2022-2026 Strategic Goals
JUNE
Reinvigorated USDOT's programmatic enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
2021
1964, the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the Americans with Disabilities
Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and the Air Carrier Access Act
NOVEMBER
Began implementation of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which contains historic
2021
investments in transportation equity
DECEMBER
Reinforced small business requirements in the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
2021
acquisition governance process
JANUARY
Launched USDOT-wide procurement dashboard to drive accountability for small
2022
and disadvantaged business goals
JANUARY
2022
Published toolkit for planning and funding rural and Tribal electric mobility infrastructure
5
The Equity Action Plan as a Living Document
The Equity Action Plan establishes a foundation for USDOT's path
towards building a transportation system that works for all people. The
The Equity Action
plan outlined on the following pages considers equity from multiple
Plan will lay the
angles, centering on communities that have been underserved,
foundation for
overburdened, and disadvantaged by past transportation decisions.
Rather than being a complete synopsis, this document marks an
institutionalizing equity
early step in the Department's journey, one that will inevitably grow
in all of USDOT's
and change throughout the process. To accommodate this evolving
programs and policies.
process, this living document will be regularly adapted. At any time, it will
represent a portion of the actions the Department is taking to
advance equity.
&
&
INSTITUTIONALIZE
Resources are
continuously provided
to embed equity, civil
rights, and social justice
SCALE UP
initiatives into the
TIT
- - -
Significant resources
Department's decision-
provided to support
making processes, and
equity, civil rights,
equity is a core part of
and social justice
the Department's mission
BUILDING
initiatives, reflecting
Equity is recognized as a
high prioritization and
benefit to communities
focus throughout the
and awareness is
FOUNDATION
department
acknowledged
Equity is part of the
discussion, but no
strategic plan is in
place to define a goal,
initiative, or desired
outcomes beyond federal
regulations
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF
WHO SHOULD READ THE EQUITY
HOW CAN I ENGAGE ON THE
THE EQUITY ACTION PLAN?
ACTION PLAN?
EQUITY ACTION PLAN?
The Equity Action Plan highlights
Send an email to equity@dot.gov to
key actions and steps that will be
The Equity Action Plan is designed
share your thoughts on advancing
taken by USDOT to create a more
to benefit and inform everyone.
transportation equity. Stay up to
equitable transportation system
date on USDOT's equity efforts by
and country.
visiting transportation.gov/equity.
6
Wealth Creation
OUTCOME
Building capital, expanding business networks, and attaining new skills and experience through increased USDOT contracts.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Increase USDOT direct contract dollars to small disadvantaged businesses to an aspirational goal of 20% by FY25.
CRITICAL GAPS¹
These top 4 industries accounted for $2.8B out of $7.8B total FY20
67% of FY20-FY21
USDOT direct contract dollars:
USDOT direct
contracting dollars
Engineering
Highway, Street,
were awarded by FAA.
Services
and Bridge
Construction
The other 33% of USDOT
Other
direct contracting dollars
Computer
System Design
Computer
were awarded by other
Related
Services
operating administrations.
Services
USDOT will focus equity efforts on programs that will have the
Black and Hispanic-owned businesses were underrepresented,
greatest impact on small disadvantaged business opportunities,
receiving only 1.7% and 2.4% of FY20 USDOT direct contract dollars
including the many FAA contracting opportunities.
in these 4 industries, respectively.
ROOT DRIVERS
Restrictive Procurement Practices
Uneven Resource Distribution
Limited Networks
Federal law, policies, and programs
Lack of access to capital sources
Minority-owned businesses and small
can become inadvertent barriers.
mean Black and Hispanic-owned
disadvantaged businesses often
At USDOT, priorities to reduce
businesses have less growth capital.
lack a robust professional network.
contract awards may have led to
These businesses are half as likely as
This makes it more difficult to develop
contract consolidation, harming small
non-minority counterparts to be fully
working relationships with those who
disadvantaged business opportunities.
approved for loans, lines of credit, and
have industry access, expertise, and
Requirements and resource
cash advances.²
experience when navigating the complex
constraints create incentives for
Minority-owned businesses and small
federal marketplace.
agencies to purchase from large,
disadvantaged businesses often have
Minority-owned businesses and
established businesses. Filling high-
inadequate bonding capacity and
small disadvantaged businesses
volume contracts can lower costs but
access to surety expertise. This makes
often do not know how and when
often excludes new entrants and small
it difficult to compete and perform in
to engage with federal programs.
businesses seeking to grow capacity.
government contracts, which limits
Limited awareness of federal programs
award opportunities of many small
can impact ability to provide input on
disadvantaged businesses.
program design, access to funding, and
contract opportunities.
TIMELINE OF USDOT ACTIONS
Launch USDOT-wide procurement dashboard
Promote and provide technical
to drive accountability for small and
assistance to small disadvantaged
disadvantaged business goals - January 2022
businesses - Ongoing
Reinforce small business requirements
Initiate rulemaking to improve and reduce
Provide increased internal trainings regarding
in the FAA acquisition governance
burdens associated with the DBE and Airport
recent acquisition policy updates and
process - December 2021
Concession DBE program - April 2022
incorporate into performance standards for
program leaders - Ongoing
THE OPPORTUNITY AT STAKE
KEY USDOT ACCOUNTABILITY ACTION
Addressing systemic barriers and
Incorporate elements of small disadvantaged business goals into
achieving the 20% goal for small
+$1.6B
management performance plans.
disadvantaged businesses could result in
of USDOT direct contract dollars annually to these businesses.¹
7
Power of Community
OUTCOME
Individuals and communities have a greater voice in transportation decisions affecting them.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Increase in the number of State Departments of Transportation (DOTs) and Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) officially adopting a
quantitative Equity Screening component to their Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) and Transportation Improvement
Program (TIP) development processes to incorporate community vision and need in project selection and design.
Increase in the number of meaningful and representative public participation engagements held by MPOs and State DOTS in the development
of STIPs and TIPs in rural and urban communities.
CRITICAL GAPS
Individuals who are young, have low-incomes, or have less formal
More than 30 million Americans live in areas where there is no
education are less likely to attend public meetings.4 This means
broadband infrastructure that provides minimally acceptable
that the interests of these groups may be underrepresented in the
speeds.³
transportation decision-making process.
About 1 in 10
Americans lack
Factors that influence public meeting attendance:
.
.
.
high-speed internet
access, making it
difficult to participate
in virtual public
involvement activities.
Age
Income
Education
ROOT DRIVERS
Status Quo Thinking
One-Size-Fits-Al Methods
Lack of Accountability
Public involvement is often treated
Public meetings are a common public involvement
Measuring the effectiveness of
as an event rather than a process.5
strategy, but can be inconvenient or impossible to
public involvement is challenging
In many cases, community members
attend for some. Physical meeting locations may be
and time-consuming.6 Few practical
are not involved in early discussions
inaccessible for some, including those with disabilities.
methods for evaluating the success of
to identify solutions with agency
Virtual public meetings are inaccessible for people
public involvement activities have been
partners.
without internet access or computer literacy.
developed, and they have not yet been
Traditional print and radio reach
Various methods may be needed to allow people
applied at large scale.
limited audiences. Social media,
with diverse circumstances to have a voice in
Agencies are often compliance-
pop-up events, and community
decisions that affect their community. Adaptive
focused when it comes to public
meetings, used by some, are more
engagement strategies can be a resource-intensive
involvement. Measures of inputs,
effective at reaching diverse groups in
but valuable endeavor that is responsive to specific
such as number of meetings, are
rural and urban areas.
community needs, including different language and
not distinguished from measures
cultural backgrounds.
of impacts, such as changes to a
proposed project.
TIMELINE OF USDOT ACTIONS
Conduct assessment of MPO and State DOT
Establish Department-wide monitoring
inclusion of quantitative equity screenings and
of USDOT funding recipient compliance
meaningful and representative public participation in
with their meaningful public participation
STIPs and TIPs - June 2022
obligations - September 2023
Reinvigorate USDOT's programmatic enforcement of Title VI of
Issue guidance for USDOT funding recipients to meet the
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the National Environmental Policy Act
requirements of meaningful public participation under
of 1969, the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the
Title VI, NEPA, and other existing requirements, with
Rehabilitation Act, and the Air Carrier Access Act - June 2021
accompanying best practices and trainings - March 2023
THE OPPORTUNITY AT STAKE
KEY USDOT ACCOUNTABILITY ACTION
Meaningfully involving the public in decision-
Binding USDOT Orders on programmatic enforcement of
making processes will help ensure that
F$446B
Title VI and NEPA, including obligations for meaningful public
in transportation formula grants
participation.
authorized by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) for FY22-FY26
to be distributed through State and local government agencies
benefit communities and mitigate any potential harms to them.7
8
Interventions
OUTCOME
Historically overburdened and underserved communities in urban and rural areas benefit from access to a generational investment in the nation's
infrastructure through direct, hands on technical support for transportation projects with local impact.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Increase in the number of USDOT discretionary grant applicants from disadvantaged communities in urban and rural areas who
have
never
applied for USDOT funding before.
Increase in the number of new projects in disadvantaged communities utilizing formula funds added to Statewide Transportation Improvement
Programs (STIPs) and Transportation Improvement Programs (TIPs).
CRITICAL GAPS
BIL provides an unprecedented
Transportation Grants Funding from Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL),
level of competitive grant funding
FY22 through FY26
that can directly benefit disadvantaged
communities in urban and rural areas
under the Justice40 initiative. Yet 69% of
transportation funding will be allocated
Competitive $196B (31%)
by formulas set by statute. The formulas
$
are not required to account for equity,
limiting the Department's ability to direct
$642 billion
resources to underserved, overburdened,
total transportation
Formula $446B (69%)
and disadvantaged communities.7
grants funding
ROOT DRIVERS
Limited Resources
Systemic Barriers Remain
Income and Wealth Disparities
Underserved communities may lack the
Disadvantaged communities have
Navigating the complex environment
resources needed to develop successful
experienced decades of infrastructure
of federal grant opportunities requires
discretionary grant applications.
injustice. Disinvestment and lack of
specialized expertise and experience.
Without assistance, many underserved
infrastructure funding have compounded
Overburdened or disadvantaged
communities may miss chances to compete
years of systemically racist transportation
communities in urban and rural areas may
for discretionary funding due to a lack of
decisions which have been left
not have adequate resources to gain access
resources rather than a lack of need.
unresolved.
to the necessary expertise and experience.
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
Communities of color are
Benefit-cost analysis (BCA) is very
have limited capacity to advocate
disenfranchised from the decision-
influential in discretionary grant
on behalf of their community. CBOs
making process. Members of
applications. BCAs require specialized
can represent the most underserved
underserved communities have received
analysis tools. When underserved
and overburdened communities and
less priority in infrastructure investments,
communities do not have access to those
understand them best. However,
often shouldering the burden of its
tools, potentially beneficial projects in
coordinating with stakeholders,
environmental and economic impacts.8
underserved communities might not be
transportation agencies, and contractors is
selected due to incomplete or flawed BCAs.
a costly and time-consuming process.
TIMELINE OF USDOT ACTIONS
Re-launch Advisory Committee on
Launch a national equity accelerator to
Publish toolkit for planning and
Transportation Equity to provide
provide hands-on support to underserved
funding rural and Tribal electric
independent advice on USDOT
and overburdened communities accessing
mobility infrastructure - January 2022
equity programs - May 2022
USDOT funds - December 2022
Launch federal partnerships
Pilot a new approach that will reduce
Issue a call for projects for place-based
with key agencies making place-
administrative burden for applicants
initiatives that are co-designed with
based investments - April 2022
considering applying for multiple
communities most impacted by poor
discretionary grant programs - June 2022
access and climate change - April 2023
THE OPPORTUNITY AT STAKE
KEY USDOT ACCOUNTABILITY ACTION
Providing technical support to underserved communities will
Consultation with the re-constituted Advisory Committee on
make sure they have the opportunity to access the
Transportation Equity.
+ $642B
in transportation grants funding
authorized by the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law (BIL) for FY22-FY26.7
9
Expanding Access
OUTCOME
Increase in social and economic opportunity for disadvantaged and underserved communities from the provision of affordable multi-modal
transportation options and the development of a transportation cost burden measure.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Reduction in transportation travel cost as a percent of income.
Reduction in transportation travel time.
Increase in access to key destinations, including work, education, grocery stores, health care.
Increase in mobility measured by number of trips at the individual level.
CRITICAL GAPS
Workers who commute by bus have
The lowest income
High
11%
commute times 1.7x longer than workers
households spend on
Income
15%
who commute alone by car: 47 minutes for
average 37% of their
bus commuters compared to 26 minutes for
after-tax income on
Middle
19%
car commuters.9
transportation, compared
Income
22%
to 19% by the middle-
income households.10
Low
37%
47 minutes
Income
0%
40%
26 minutes
Transportation Spending as Percent
of After Tax Income
ROOT DRIVERS
Higher Transportation Costs
Lack of Transportation Options and Access
Lower income people spend a far greater percent
Many areas of the country have been labeled "transit deserts." The inability to
of their income on transportation than middle-
access jobs, schools, health care and social service organizations leads to higher
income or high-income households.¹ Equitable
rates of unemployment, poverty, chronic illness, and isolation.
and high quality transportation systems can help
Infrastructure and land use policy has often made car-ownership a necessity.
address these disparities and increase residents'
Decades of transportation and land use policy have focused on mobility for
upward economic mobility.11
automobile users. This bias has left people without access to vehicles lacking in
The transportation cost burden experienced by
mobility options.
an individual is influenced by numerous factors.
Multimodal options have been neglected. Policies that ensure that streets have
Inadequate coordination of land use, housing
sidewalks and bike lanes that are safe and accessible to pedestrians, bicyclists, and
and transportation policy and investment leads to
users of public transit gives residents more travel options and more control over their
inefficient transportation options that negatively
transportation expenses. Land use policies that prevent people, jobs, goods, and
impact social, economic and health outcomes. These
services from being proximate to one another or near transit reduce the feasibility
factors can vary substantially across communities.
of low cost, environmentally efficient modes such as walking, cycling and transit.
TIMELINE OF USDOT ACTIONS
Launch enhanced transportation cost
Require discretionary grant projects to report
Major completion of the National Transit Map
burden measure (incorporating new
on benefits (including expanded access) to
to improve data on transit access, system
data sources) as part of a transportation
disadvantaged communities - January 2022
quality, and performance - December 2024
disadvantage index - December 2027
Introduce racial equity and
Pilot transportation cost burden
Develop new data collection focused on capturing
barriers to opportunity as a
measure using existing data sources
individual and household cost, travel time, trips not
consideration for awarding
to screen transportation projects for
taken, accessibility, and access to key resources across
discretionary grants - February 2021
funding - December 2023
different demographic groups - December 2026
THE OPPORTUNITY AT STAKE
KEY USDOT ACCOUNTABILITY ACTIONS
Building a transportation cost burden measure will
Develop criteria for incorporating transportation cost burden measure
help USDOT better understand the second largest
in project selection decision-making.
expenditure category for households, accounting for
Incorporate elements of the transportation cost burden measure into
$10,742
on average (15% of after-tax income)
funding programs and policy documents.
,
in 2019. Transportation expenses are
second only to housing expenses.10
10
Glossary of Concepts & Endnotes
TERM
DEFINITION
Advisory Committee on
This committee provides advice and recommendations to the Secretary of Transportation on comprehensive,
Transportation Equity
interdisciplinary issues related to transportation equity from a variety of stakeholders involved in transportation
planning, design, research, policy, and advocacy.
Air Carrier Access Act (ACAA)
The ACAA prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in air travel.
Americans with
The ADA prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in all areas of public life, including jobs,
Disabilities Act (ADA)
schools, transportation, and all public and private places that are open to the general public.
Disadvantaged Business
DBEs are for-profit small business concerns where socially and economically disadvantaged individuals own at
Enterprise (DBE)
least a 51% interest and also control management and daily business operations.
Disadvantaged
Disadvantaged communities are communities that experience disproportionately high and adverse health,
communities
environmental, climate related, economic, and other cumulative impacts.
Equity
Equity means the consistent and systematic fair, just, and impartial treatment of all individuals, including
individuals who belong to underserved communities that have been denied such treatment, such as Black,
Latino, and Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and other persons
of color; members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons;
persons with disabilities; persons who live in rural areas; and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent
poverty or inequality.
Justice40
A government-wide initiative established under Executive Order 14008: Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and
Abroad that aims to deliver 40 percent of the overall benefits of relevant federal investments in climate and
sustainable transportation to disadvantaged communities.
Minority Business
A minority business enterprise is defined as a company that is at least 51% owned and operated by an individual
Enterprise (MBE)
that is at least 25% African American, Asian, Hispanic, or Native American. If the company is publicly traded, then
the stock must be at least 51% minority-owned as well.
Metropolitan Planning
MPOs are organizations designated to carry out the metropolitan transportation planning process in urban
Organizations (MPOs)
areas with populations greater than 50,000 people.
National Environmental
NEPA requires Federal agencies to assess the environmental effects of proposed major Federal actions prior to
Policy Act (NEPA)
making decisions.
Overburdened
Overburdened communities are minority, low-income, tribal, or Indigenous populations or geographic locations
communities
in the United States that potentially experience disproportionate environmental and/or safety harms and risks.
This disproportionality can be a result of greater vulnerability to environmental hazards, heightened safety risks,
lack of opportunity for public participation, or other factors.
Section 504 of the
Section 504 prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities in programs that receive federal
Rehabilitation Act
financial assistance.
Small Disadvantaged
A small disadvantaged business is a firm that meets the following criteria: 51% or more owned and controlled
Business
by one or more disadvantaged persons; the disadvantaged person or persons is socially disadvantaged and
economically disadvantaged; the firm is small, according to the Small Business Administration's size standard.
Statewide Transportation
STIPs are federally mandated 4-year funding and scheduling documents for surface transportation projects
Improvement Program (STIP)
(road, highway, pedestrian trails, bicycle facilities, bridge facilities and transit projects).
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
Title VI prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin in any program or activity that
receives Federal funds or other Federal financial assistance.
Transportation Improvement
TIPs are approved and planned at the MPO level, and must be included in the STIP to receive federal funding.
Plan (TIP)
Underserved communities
Underserved communities are populations sharing a particular characteristic, as well as geographic
communities, that have been systematically denied a full opportunity to participate in aspects of economic,
social, and civic life, as exemplified by the list in the preceding definition of equity.
ENDNOTES
1.
SAM.gov. All USDOT direct contracting dollars, including FAA, across FY20 and FY21.
2. Federal Reserve (2021). Small Business Credit Survey 2021 Report on Firms Owned by People of Color. (Based on data from 2020-2021). Available at https://www.fedsmallbusiness.org/
 medialibrary/FedSmallBusiness/files/2021/sbcs-report-on-firms-owned-by-people-of-color
3.
The White House. (2021). Fact Sheet: The Bipartisan Deal.
4.
Hoang, B. L. (2021). Racial disparities in public meeting participation? Examining past evidence and nationally representative data (data drawn from 2008 & 2012 ANES surveys). Urban Affairs
Review, 57(1) 189-213.
5.
Aimen, D., & Morris, A. (2012). Practical approaches for involving traditionally underserved populations in transportation decision making (No. Project 8-72).
6.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2019). Measuring the Effectiveness of Public Involvement in Transportation Planning and Project Development.
The
National
Academies Press.
7.
U.S.
Department of Transportation. Bipartisan Infrastructure Law Dashboard. (Based on FY22-FY26 funding levels). Available at https://www.transportation.gov/mission/budget/bipartisan-
infrastructure-law-dashboard
8.
Archer, D. . (2020). Transportation Policy and the Underdevelopment of Black Communities. Iowa L. Rev., 106, 2125
9.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2021). Census Bureau Estimates Show Average One-Way Travel Time to Work Rises to All-Time High. (Based
on
2019
data).
[press
release].
10.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Expenditure Survey. (Based on 2019 Data). Available at https://data.bts.gov/stories/s/ida7-k95k#transportation-expenditures-
and-income
11. Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Jones, M. R., & Porter, S. R. (2020). Race and economic opportunity in the United States: An intergenerational perspective. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2),
711-783.
11
