U.S. Department
of Transportation
Capacity Assessment
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
2
ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS CURRENTLY BEING EVALUATED AND ANALYZED
2
RESEARCH
2
STATISTICS
2
EVALUATION
2
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
2
APPENDIX: CAPACITY ASSESSMENT INVENTORY
2
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
2
INTRODUCTION
In accordance with the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Public Law No. 115-435
(Evidence Act), the United States Department of Transportation (DOT or the Department) is pleased to
present the Capacity Assessment. The following report assesses DOT's research, statistics, and evaluation
capabilities based on a number of criteria defined in Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Memorandum M-19-23. In accordance with the Evidence Act and relevant OMB guidance, this document
covers:
a. A list of the highest priority activities and operations of DOT that are currently being evaluated and
analyzed;
b.
The extent to which the research, statistics, and evaluation efforts and related activities of the DOT
support the needs of various divisions within the Department;
C.
The extent to which the research, statistics, and evaluation efforts and related activities of the DOT
address an appropriate balance among competing needs related to organizational learning, ongoing
program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency and private
sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability;
d. The extent to which DOT uses methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate to DOT
divisions and the corresponding research questions being addressed, including an appropriate
combination of formative and summative evaluation, research, and analysis approaches;
e. The extent to which the evaluation and research capacity is present within the DOT to include
personnel and DOT processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities, disseminating best
practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback; and
f.
The extent to which the DOT has the capacity to assist DOT staff and program offices to develop the
capacity to use evaluation, research, and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-day operations.
In FY 2022, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), also known as the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law, created generational investments to improve our nation's roads and bridges, promote safety for all road
users, help combat the climate crisis, and advance equitable access to transportation. This legislation may
provide the Department will additional opportunities to advance its evidence-building practices.
The document is structured by major evidence-building practice - research, statistics, and evaluation - and
includes a discussion of the coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of each evidence
type. Using the results of this assessment, the Department seeks to establish initial understanding of DOT's
ability, capacity, and infrastructure to carry out evidence-building activities to inform future evidence-based
decision-making. This assessment also provides senior officials with the information needed to:
Fulfill the Evidence Act's intent of improving DOT's ability to support the development and use of
evaluation;
Coordinate and increase technical expertise available for evaluation and related research activities
within DOT; and
Improve the quality of evaluations and knowledge of evaluation methodologies and standards across
the Department.
This document was created by the Office of the Chief Financial Officer and Assistant Secretary for Budget and
Programs (OST-B), in collaboration with DOT's Evidence Act senior officials and a variety of key stakeholders
from across the Department who possess subject matter expertise in research, statistics, and evaluation.
OST-B interviewed several senior leaders within the Office of the Secretary and the Operating
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
3
Administrations to develop conclusions included below. The Capacity Assessment will serve as a living
document and be updated to inform capacity building throughout the Department in the coming years.
CONCEPTS AND PRINCIPLES
In its Memorandum M-19-23, OMB directs agencies to assess their evidence activities across five
dimensions: coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence. For the purpose of the Capacity
Assessment, DOT used the following definitions for these dimensions, which are adapted from OMB Circular
A-11 Section 290: Evaluation and Evidence-Building Activities:
Coverage: Describes the evidence activities that are happening and where in the Department the
activities are occurring.
Quality: Describes the extent to which data and other information used in the course of conducting
evidence activities are of high quality with respect to utility, objectivity, and scientific integrity.
Methods: Describes the techniques, systems, and processes used in evidence generation. Methods
may vary by evidence type; however, all methodologies should include an appropriate level of rigor
and take an empirically proven approach.
Effectiveness: Describes the extent to which evidence activities are meeting their intended outcomes,
including serving the needs of stakeholders and being disseminated appropriately.
Independence: Describes the extent to which the activities being carried out are free from bias and
inappropriate influence.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
4
ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS CURRENTLY
BEING EVALUATED AND ANALYZED
DOT conducted a data call to all Operating Administrations to inventory the highest-priority activities and
operations currently being evaluated or analyzed across the Department. The results of this data call are
available in the Appendix. This inventory is not a comprehensive list of all ongoing evaluations and analyses
but represents the most critical activities as identified by the Operating Administrations. In future years, the
Department may continue building out this inventory to gain a more robust understanding of the Operating
Administrations' evaluation and analysis functions.
Additionally, in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 6501, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Research and
Technology (OST-R) publishes an Annual Modal Research Plan for each Operating Administration detailing
planned studies and analyses for the upcoming fiscal years beyond what is included in the Appendix of this
document.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
5
RESEARCH
COVERAGE
DOT conducts a wide range of research activities to help solve transportation challenges and address issues
of national significance. OST-R works closely with the Departmental Operating Administrations and all
segments of the transportation sector to identify gaps in research and appropriately invest Federal resources
to improve the performance of the national transportation system. OST-R maintains a five-year Research,
Development, & Technology (RD&T) Strategic Plan, which meets the requirement set forth in 49 U.S.C.
6503. The plan was recently updated with an addendum to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on research priorities. 49 U.S.C. 6501 also requires "the head of each Operating Administration and joint
program office1" to submit an Annual Modal Research Plan, consistent with the Department's RD&T Strategic
Plan, for review and approval by OST-R. (Note that the Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway and the Office of
the Inspector General do not submit Annual Modal Research Plans because they either do not receive
appropriated research funding or they do not have a research office conducting RD&T programs.) The Annual
Modal Research Plans provide a comprehensive overview of Operating Administrations' research plans for
the upcoming fiscal year, as well as a detailed outlook for the following fiscal year. The reviews conducted by
OST-R are intended to identify and eliminate duplicative research efforts performed by different organizations
across the Department and to ensure that Operating Administrations' research activities are consistent with
the DOT RD&T Strategic Plan. The most recent Annual Modal Research Plans are available on OST-R's
website.
OST-R and the Operating Administrations often partner with the John A. Volpe National Transportation
Systems Center (Volpe Center) and fund their research efforts through the Innovative Research Program
Office. This office oversees and coordinates five key research programs around small business innovation,
exploratory advanced research, Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), technology transfer, and highway
safety countermeasures. The Volpe Center works closely with both OST-R and the Operating Administrations
to serve the innovative research needs of the Department.
OST-R facilitates research collaboration with external transportation organizations such as the Transportation
Research Board and the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials, as well as
universities and institutes of higher education. These partnerships help to optimize the efficiency, relevance,
and deployment of transportation research, data, and findings and provide opportunities to coordinate and
align research initiatives across the nation.
QUALITY
OST-R guides the quality of research activities through the Scientific Integrity Policy, DOT Public Access
Plan, Public Access Implementation Working Group, and the RD&T Planning Team. In accordance with the
Scientific Integrity Policy, all research used to support DOT policy decisions must undergo an independent
peer review by qualified experts. The DOT Public Access Plan requires research conducted through grants to
be assigned a DOT grant manager who ensures data used in research meets quality standards. The Public
Access Implementation Working Group supports several DOT research programs that focus on developing
new, high-quality data sources, tools, and models to enable the exchange and analysis of data used to inform
decision-making. The RD&T Planning Team also convenes monthly to discuss best practices in research
quality and incorporates these practices into Operating Administration guidance on Annual Modal Research
Plan development. At the Operating Administration level, 13 documents were identified as standards or
guidance to improve research quality. These documents complement Department-wide policies and
guidance. DOT is assessing ways to improve transparency of research findings. To expand public access, the
Department is currently responding to the Public Access directive to develop and implement new processes
1
Includes the Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
|
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
6
to implement the Public Access Plan. The Department is also working to improve data completeness and
accuracy in the Research Hub.
METHODS
Research bodies across the Department are responsible for determining the appropriate methods to conduct
research activities. OST-R strives to facilitate the widest possible awareness and coordination among
recipients of research funding so they may draw upon one another's data, methods, or findings. OST-R's
centralized review of Annual Modal Research Plans facilitates the sharing of methods across similar research
activities. The Department is also taking steps to incorporate cutting-edge methodologies, such as big data in
cybersecurity, Artificial Intelligence learning, analysis of multimodal connectivity, and safety assessments.
Several Operating Administrations host external events to seek feedback on methods and future research.
EFFECTIVENESS
The Department has a centralized and thorough process to prioritize research activities and eliminate
duplication. In FY 2018, OST-R led the creation of 11 topical research working groups on topics aligned to the
Department's FY 2018 - 2022 strategic goals. The working groups are currently being restructured to align to
the new strategic goals as defined in the DOT FY 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan and associated RD&T Strategic
Plan. The Department recognizes the challenges of assessing the value of research investments and outcomes
and seeks to strengthen its evaluation processes. The recent publication of the Research and Development
logic model is a significant step towards identifying the series of long-term outcomes that could be measured,
as is the establishment of a new Performance Management Data System (PMDS) that allows OST-R to track
and coordinate the Department's research portfolio at the project level.
A Research Review Working Group, chaired by OST-R, annually reviews and makes recommendations to
DOT leadership on the research activities of the Operating Administrations to ensure that the Department's
research portfolio aligns with Secretarial policy priorities, complies with statutory mandates, and makes
effective and efficient use of its research funds. This working group has proven vital to the research
community at the Department in delivering resource efficiencies and accelerating the sharing and deployment
of new technologies and research results. To encourage widespread use of said results, OST-R encourages
Operating Administrations to make their research outcomes and technical reports publicly available on the
DOT Research Hub and the National Transportation Library (NTL).
The Department is working to define and monitor progress toward long-term research outcomes. A
Technology Transfer, Evaluation and Performance Measurement working group leads this effort and seeks to
incorporate leading practices from other agencies. In addition, OST-B and OST-R will collaborate to continue
to align the RD&T Strategic Plan and Learning Agenda to strengthen the effectiveness of the Department's
research activities.
INDEPENDENCE
Since FY 2009, OST-R has maintained a Scientific Integrity Policy and accompanying implementation
manual to ensure political appointees do not exert undue influence over scientists in the conduct of scientific
research. The Operating Administrations abide by the Department-leve policy. The Department has had no
formal complaints filed by DOT employees, nor have any external recipients of DOT research funding claimed
to have experienced impediments by management against publication.
In compliance with the Memorandum on Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and
Evidence-Based Policymaking, the Department named a Chief Science Officer and Scientific Integrity Officer
to ensure the highest level of integrity in all aspects of the Department's involvement with scientific and
technological processes. OST-R is leading an effort to review and update the Department's Scientific Integrity
policy to comply with all requirements of the memorandum, including conducting routine training on the
policy.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
7
The Department is exploring ways to monitor and assess the implementation of the Scientific Integrity Policy.
Department has an opportunity to strengthen its monitoring and assessment practices. Through this process,
the Department can also ensure alignment between the Scientific Integrity Policy and the Evaluation
Framework per the presidential memorandum referenced above.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
8
STATISTICS
COVERAGE
The Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS), an OMB-designated Principal Statistical Agency in DOT,
provides statistics that encompass all modes of transportation, and ensures that the statistics compiled are
designed to support transportation decision-making. Specifically, BTS is one of the primary sources of
statistics on commercial aviation, multi-modal freight, and transportation economics, and provides context to
decision makers and the public for understanding statistics on transportation. BTS provides timely, accurate,
and credible information on the National transportation system, the movement of people and goods, and the
consequences of transportation for the economy, society, and the environment. To complete the statistics life
cycle, BTS' NTL curates, archives, and disseminates all transportation information. The NTL is a permanent,
publicly accessible home for research publications and data from throughout the transportation community;
the gateway to all DOT data; and the help line for the Congress, researchers, and the public for information
about transportation. BTS publishes the Transportation Statistics Annual Report, which characterizes the state
of the transportation system and the state of transportation statistics and submits this report each year to
Congress and the President. In addition to the responsibilities described above, BTS offers guidance to and
serves as a resource for Operating Administrations' statistical offices, and the BTS Director serves as the
senior advisor to the Secretary on data and statistics and as the Department's Statistical Official. An overview
of additional BTS products and services is available in the BTS Strategic Plan.
The BTS Director leads the Bureau's approximately 55 employees, including more than 40 statisticians,
economists, and specialists in geospatial statistics, data science, and library science. The BTS workforce is
supplemented by BTS Fellows and contractors. The Bureau provides opportunities for its staff to strengthen
their skill sets through trainings, conferences, and university programs, such as the Joint Program in Survey
Methodology.
The Operating Administrations perform critical statistical functions to collect and organize information about
their respective modes of transportation. There are an estimated seven OMB-recognized statistical units
performing statistical functions within the Operating Administrations with more than 100 full time-equivalent
employees. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) National Center for Statistics and
Analysis is the largest recognized statistical unit at the Department with 70 full time-equivalent employees.
The Department is working on several initiatives to improve the coverage of statistical activities:
Increase frequency of national data collection on personal and household travel: The Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) conducts the National Household Travel Survey, the authoritative source of
travel behavior of the American public. This survey is conducted every five to seven years. The
COVID-19 pandemic is leading to a "new transportation normal" and increased uncertainty around
travel behaviors. Decreasing time between surveys, or developing scaled-down versions of the survey,
would provide necessary information to understand how, when, and why the American public is
traveling.
Collection of real-time transit data: The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) receives transit ridership
data that is months or sometimes years old and driven by legislative requirements. The COVID-19
pandemic has impacted assumptions on ridership, and real-time data would help FTA understand the
potential "new normal" for transit. During FY 2022, FTA plans to propose a timelier data collection
method in the Federal Register.
Increase staff capacity on statistical science or transportation topics: DOT is working to train staff to
have a combination of statistical competencies and transportation subject matter expertise.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
9
Improve data collection from States on safety interventions: Increasing the timeliness of reporting and
data collection from State DOTs would improve NHTSA's understanding of the effectiveness of
specific safety interventions. NHTSA will be undertaking a new initiative under the recently authorized
Crash Data Program to improve its knowledge of roadway incidents.
Improve the coverage and timeliness of data on supply chain visibility and bottlenecks: DOT is
working to improve coverage and timeliness of data on supply chain to better characterize and
address supply chain challenges in the freight and logistics sector. Improving the coverage and
timeliness of this data would enhance the evidence-building activities of the Department in support of
Executive Order No. 14017 and the Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force.
Improve data collection needed to adequately advance transportation equity: The Department is
exploring ways to collect data to inform statistical analyses of equity in transportation with respect to
underserved populations and communities. Based on the data assessment results from the 200-Day
Equity report to OMB, and inputs provided by stakeholders through a Request for Information and by
others, improving the coverage and geospatial granularity of socioeconomic and transportation data
would enhance the evidence-building activities of the Department in support of Executive Order No.
13985.
QUALITY
BTS provides statistical policy leadership through its participation in the Interagency Council on Statistical
Policy, Federal Geographic Data Committee, American Statistical Association, and DOT Geospatial Data
Council, as well as its sponsorship of the Committee on National Statistics and the Transportation Research
Board. While BTS does not exercise direct authority over Operating Administrations' statistical offices, it
encourages collaboration and quality improvement among DOT statistical programs. BTS also provides
advice on good statistical practice, performance measurement, geographic data coordination, and
minimization of response burden. This includes the development of the Annual Performance Data
Completeness and Reliability Template, and review of Information Collection Request packages containing
surveys, censuses, or employing statistical methods that DOT submits to the OMB Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs.
The Department is assessing ways to expand BTS's ability to provide advice on statistical quality to Operating
Administrations and to increase staff capacity for data quality assessment.
STATISTICAL METHODS
Congress requires BTS to "continually improve surveys and data collection methods of the Department to
improve the accuracy and utility of transportation statistics." BTS promotes innovative methods of data
collection, statistical modeling, analysis, visualization, and dissemination to improve operational efficiency,
examine emerging topics, and create relevant and timely statistics. While BTS continues to improve
traditional methods, the rapid advancement in statistical sciences requires BTS to investigate new methods of
data collection, processing, analysis, quality assurance, dissemination, and preservation to enhance future
products and services.
The Department has identified five initiatives to improve statistical methods:
Keep pace with innovation in data collection and analysis methods: As the demand for data and
statistics continues to grow, methods of collection and analysis are undergoing major change. Surveys
that are compliant with the Paper Reduction Act requirements remain a critical source of data, but
their cost-effectiveness is declining. The widespread replacement of paper with electronic
transactions in businesses, the growth of online shopping, the exploding use of electronic sensors for
2
49 U.S.C. § 6302(b)(3)(B)(iv)
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
10
controlling everything from vehicle engines to traffic signals, extensive coverage of cell phones, and
the complete coverage of publicly available aerial imagery provide new sources of data on
transportation and its consequences. These new data sources often involve unexplored privacy
concerns, data sharing complications, poorly documented quality problems, and integration
challenges. Alternative data sources such as administrative records and sensor data can also present
data quality issues that require time to identify and resolve. Furthermore, access to and use of some
alternative data sources can require complex negotiations to balance proprietary interests and
confidentiality concerns with the desire to provide public access to the data. Such negotiations take
time and require experience to perform effectively.
Provide recruitment and training on advanced statistical methods: Statistical methodologies and data
sciences are rapidly evolving. The Bureau often relies on fellowship programs and other channels to fill
knowledge gaps. BTS will focus its recruitment and training efforts on cutting-edge methodologies to
improve its capacity in this area.
Improve statistical sampling systems to understand crashes: NHTSA has collected crash data since
the early 1970s to support its mission to reduce motor vehicle crashes, injuries, and deaths on our
nation's highways. The Crash Investigation Sampling System is one of several components of
NHTSA's crash data collection program. Expansion of the Crash Investigation Sampling System
program in combination with increased use and acquisition of electronic crash data would provide
several benefits: increased data to improve overall accuracy; improved statistical efficiency through
increased sample selection size; and further protect data that could be deemed sensitive or personally
identifiable information using advanced security measures.
Develop improved methods to estimate distributional equity impacts of regional transportation
investments: In addition to improvements in data collection needed to adequately advance
transportation equity as described above, there is also a need for the development and adoption of
improved methods for assessing the impacts of transportation programs and policies on underserved
communities. The development and adoption of such methods would enhance the evidence-building
activities of the Department in support of Executive Order No. 13985.
Develop improved methods to gain increased visibility into supply chains and to better understand the
nature of supply chain bottlenecks: Improvements in the coverage and timeliness of data on supply
chains is required to better characterize and address supply chain challenges in the freight and
logistics sector. There is a need to explore the use of alternative data from both public and private
sources such as administrative records, location-based services device data, and pulse surveys, and to
integrate and link the data from these multiple sources. Improving the coverage and timeliness of
supply chain data would enhance the evidence-building activities of the Department in support of
Executive Order No. 14017 and the Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force and help the Department to
address supply chain challenges in the freight and logistics sector.
EFFECTIVENESS
By law, the BTS Director is the senior advisor to the Secretary of Transportation on data and statistics.³ BTS
carefully manages its budget and staff to meet ever-growing national needs for its services, support the
Secretary's strategic objectives, provide evidence to decision makers, fulfill the BTS legislated mandates, and
meet increased demand for transportation statistics with useful, timely, and credible products. To achieve this
balance, BTS concentrates its activities on its core areas of expertise and on improvements in developing and
delivering BTS products. In carrying out its responsibilities under the Evidence Act, BTS represents the
transportation community in the Federal Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, including participation in
the Standard Application Process Technical Working Group of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy
3 49 U.S.C. § 6302(b)(3)(A)(i)
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
11
that is focused on facilitating the sharing of confidential data among principal Federal statistical agencies for
purposes of developing evidence, as required under Title III of the Evidence Act. BTS also participates in the
Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology.
DOT has identified three areas to improve the effectiveness of statistical activities related to the following
DOT strategic goals:
Equity: In response to the recent Executive Order No. 13985, the Department plans to examine the
extent to which its programs and policies disproportionately negatively impact people of color and
other underserved communities. The Department requires additional data to inform statistical
analyses of existing inequities in transportation due to racial, ethnic, geographic, and disability
disparities. National and State-level equity data could be bolstered by obtaining additional data at the
local level to inform decisions about underserved communities. To this end, the Department will build
on public comments received on its Request for Information: Transportation Equity Data posted on
May 25, 2021, to expand its cadre of data and assessment tools that could assist in these statistical
activities.
Climate solutions: To develop and improve analytical tools to support decision-making around
climate-related topics such as transportation energy use, emerging technologies, and greenhouse gas
emissions, the Department requires robust data collection and analysis frameworks. DOT will focus
on the placement of electric vehicle charging stations. The Department will consider social and
demographic data to identify areas of high need. Furthermore, additional data could be collected to
help the Department define and understand aspects of the transportation infrastructure that are
affected by climate shocks and variability. These data could improve DOT's ability to develop
resiliency measures and assess the impacts of service disruptions on the populations the Department
serves.
Transformation and economic growth: DOT has new responsibilities to efficiently and effectively
allocate IIJA funds to improve the condition of highways, bridges, runways, and other facets of the
Nation's transportation infrastructure. The Department will improve data and analytical tools to
support the prioritization of these infrastructure investments and facilitate data-driven decisions.
INDEPENDENCE
BTS is required by statutory law to assure that all products are developed with rigor, transparency,
independence from undue influence (49 U.S.C. 6302(d)). BTS also abides by the Statement of Commitment
to Scientific Integrity by Principal Statistical Agencies and OMB Statistical Policy Directives. Given these
statutory requirements and BTS' adherence to them, the Department has not identified any areas of capacity
building needed to improve independence in statistical activities.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
12
EVALUATION
At DOT, the definition of evaluation has been historically broad and inclusive of a variety of study designs.
OMB Memorandum M-20-12, published in March 2020, provides clear definitions of evaluation and
associated terms. Upon review of DOT evaluation activities that meet the definition in this memorandum, the
Department has determined it has significant opportunities for improvement.
COVERAGE
Several Operating Administrations have undertaken evaluation activities in recent years, including FHWA,
FTA, NHTSA, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), and the Federal Railroad
Administration (FRA). Within the Operating Administrations, there are few employees with program
evaluation competencies. Most ongoing evaluations are conducted in partnership with the Volpe Center,
which is staffed with highly trained individuals who can provide objective, on-demand evaluation expertise on
transportation programs and policies. It is fully funded by the Operating Administrations that choose to
undertake projects through Volpe, making it a unique agency within DOT. Many Volpe sponsors use
evaluation, for example, to measure the effectiveness and efficiency of projects (e.g., a deployed technology),
to analyze the implementation of programs, and to assess whether processes and programs are meeting their
goals and objectives.
There are several ongoing efforts to identify, review, and organize evidence from domestic and foreign
transportation-related evaluations. The most comprehensive effort is led by the ITS Joint Program Office For
more than 20 years, the ITS Joint Program Office has been tracking evaluations of ITS technologies; archiving
studies; and documenting the benefits, costs, and lessons learned. This information is included in the world's
most comprehensive databases on ITS deployment evaluation. Another notable activity is the NHTSA
Countermeasures that Work report, which features an analysis of evidence-based traffic safety
countermeasures to support State Highway Safety Offices in decision-making. Only measures demonstrated
to be effective by several high-quality evaluations are given a five-star rating. NHTSA has released 11 editions
of the Countermeasures that Work report since 2005.
The Department is developing an agency-wide framework for supporting evaluations. DOT's Office of the
Secretary will aim to assist Operating Administrations by providing technical resources for conducting
independent evaluations. Additionally, the Department will educate staff on the benefits of evaluation,
encourage use of logic models, improve administrative data collection, and strengthen programs' overall
readiness for an evaluation. DOT is also administering a new policy that requires program evaluation for all
DOT programs funded at $1 billion or more.
QUALITY
The Department's Evaluation Framework aligns to OMB Memorandum M-20-12 and includes the principles
of rigor, relevance, transparency, independence, ethics, and equity. This framework represents a commitment
to supporting evidence-based strategic and operational decisions through evaluations that result in
continuous improvement across the Department. Following publication of the Evaluation Framework, the
Department will release an internal document with additional guidance on evaluations.
The Department plans to provide additional training to staff in program offices and develop an evaluation
community of practice. Additional training would build staff capacity to design and execute high-quality
evaluations. DOT will also review Operating Administration-level documents to align with the Department's
Evaluation Framework.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
|
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
13
METHODS
The Department's Evaluation Framework encourages Operating Administrations to apply rigor to evaluations
by using robust and unbiased evaluation designs and sound methodology and analysis. The Department also
recommends that Operating Administrations use evaluation methods that produce findings that stakeholders
can rely upon, while providing a clear explanation of the limitations of the data and the methods used. The
Capacity Assessment identified several planned or ongoing formative, implementation, and outcome
evaluations, which are described in DOT's FY 2022 and FY 2023 Evaluation Plans. These documents do not
include any impact evaluations. The Department is preparing internal guidance to improve evaluation
methods. Given the evaluation design and methodology challenges that DOT faces, the guidance will focus on
improving methodologies for evaluations with small sample sizes and methods that mitigate the effect of a
low degree of control.
EFFECTIVENESS
The Department is taking several steps to improve the effectiveness of its evaluation activities. This includes
publishing an Evaluation Framework, creating Annual Evaluation Plans, and providing technical resources to
the Operating Administrations. Additional planned actions will further strengthen the effectiveness of
evaluation:
Improve timeliness of results: Emerging technologies such as drones and self-driving cars are
constantly evolving. To guide the future of technology in transportation, the Department must make
program and policy decisions using rapidly generated evidence. Because of the nature of DOT's
mission, activities such as evaluations with a randomized control trial may, unless specifically
designed for rapid execution, run the risk of producing obsolete findings, especially given Paperwork
Reduction Act requirements. The Department will explore how to design and conduct rapid
evaluations to inform timely decision-making.
Facilitate data collection, use, and sharing for equity evaluations: In response to Executive Order
13985, the Department has identified actionable opportunities to improve data collection, use, and
sharing that would allow for disaggregation, enable DOT to assess whether services are being
delivered equitably, and improve understanding of the impact of policies and programs on
underserved communities.
Encourage and incentivize experimentation among State DOTs and grant recipients: The Department
will encourage State DOTs and other grant recipients to use experimentation as an effective tool to
achieve enhanced program outcomes.
Explore priority topics for evaluations: Interviews with the Operating Administrations revealed several
potential areas for evaluation - improving understanding of Federal highway investments' impact on
safety, building evidence to support recruiting and training of the aviation and aerospace workforce,
and building evidence to improve sustainability and resilience of Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) facilities.
INDEPENDENCE
Under the new Evaluation Framework, the Department will strive for objectivity in the planning and conduct
of evaluations and in the interpretation and dissemination of findings, avoiding conflicts of interest, bias, and
other partiality. The Department's Evaluation Framework provides broad principles to guide the planning and
execution of evaluation activities. At the Operating Administration level, historical technical documents
include guidance on evaluation activity, such as the FRA Manual for Research Development and Technology
Program and Project Evaluations. These documents will be revisited and updated to ensure alignment to the
Department's Evaluation Framework, Scientific Integrity Policy, and additional evaluation guidance.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
14
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
BTS
Bureau of Transportation Statistics
DOT
U.S. Department of Transportation
Evidence Act
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FHWA
Federal Highway Administration
FMCSA
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
FRA
Federal Railroad Administration
FTA
Federal Transit Administration
IIJA
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
ITS
Intelligent Transportation Systems
NHTSA
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
NTL
National Transportation Library
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
OST-B
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Budget and Programs
OST-R
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Research and Technology
RD&T
Research, Development, and Technology
Volpe Center
John A. Volpe National Transportation Systems Center
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
15
APPENDIX: CAPACITY ASSESSMENT INVENTORY
This inventory describes the highest-priority or most critical activities being evaluated or analyzed as identified by the Operating
Administrations. These include both ongoing and planned activities.
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
FAA Regulatory and
What are the incremental costs and
Findings will be published in the Federal
FAA
Deregulatory
benefits of each significant regulatory
Perform cost-benefit analyses.
Register.
Actions
action by FAA?
What is the expected fleet size,
General Aviation
The findings will be published in the FAA
hours flown, and utilization rate for
The forecast will be based on aircraft
FAA
Fleet and
Aerospace Forecast, available at
General Aviation aircraft over the
registry, market, and annual survey data.
Operations
https://www.faa.gov/data research/aviation
next twenty years?
In the Terminal Area Forecast, FAA uses
Passenger Demand
What is expected passenger demand
regression analyses on ticket, enplanement,
The Terminal Area Forecast report and data
FAA
and Aviation Activity
and aviation activity at U.S. airports
and economic variables to forecast
are published annually and available at:
at U.S. Airports
over the next twenty years?
passenger demand and model operations by
https://www.faa.gov/data_research/aviatior
airport.
The Enterprise Assessment results will be
Americans with
Is FHWA's Americans with
Conduct a Program Area Profile and
used in future strategic planning and
FHWA
Disabilities Act
Disabilities Act Program effective,
Enterprise Assessment.
performance management activities aimed at
Program
efficient, and compliant?
reducing discrimination.
FMCSA established the DataQ program in
February 2004. The Agency would like to
A final recommendations report will inform
FMCSA DataQ
Is FMCSA's DataQ program
FMCSA
assess its effectiveness, identify best
the development and implementation or
Program
administered evenly nationwide?
practices, and develop performance
corrective actions.
measures.
This study is being conducted in four
The study will provide vital data on the role of
phases. The first phase was a Request for
pre-crash factors, such as driving behaviors
Information from stakeholders and the
and novel technologies unavailable through
Large Truck Crash
What pre-crash factors are
FMCSA
public. The second phase is study planning,
other means. Results of the study could be
Causal Factor Study
contributing to large truck crashes?
information technology development, and
used to identify, develop, and deploy
OMB clearance. The third phase is data
countermeasures to keep large truck crashes
collection related to 2,000 crashes studied
from occurring. The data could also help
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
16
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
at 32 sites nationwide and is expected to
FMCSA understand the role of new
take two years to complete. The final phase
automation and fleet technologies, drive
will be data analysis and compilation of the
future rulemaking activities, and potentially
final report.
be reused for additional crash causal factor
studies focusing on passenger vehicles.
FMCSA is conducting an outcome
evaluation to understand the effectiveness
Is FMCSA's Drug and Alcohol
A final recommendations report will inform
Drug and Alcohol
of the Clearinghouse four years after the
FMCSA
Clearinghouse being used
the development and implementation of
Clearinghouse
June 2020 compliance data, document best
effectively?
corrective actions.
practices, and identify opportunities for
improvement.
Fidelity Assessment: Field observations,
document review (procedures, guidance,
Is the Short Line Safety Institute
Assessor manuals, etc.), and interviews with
(SLSI) conducting Safety Culture
Assessors and other SLSI staff.
Assessments of short line railroads
with strong fidelity?
Process Evaluation: Observations;
document review (e.g., training materials);
How well is SLSI executing its
survey data analysis; interviews with SLSI
Findings will be disseminated externally in
Leadership Development Training
Short Line Safety
staff, training vendors, and training
public Research Reports and will be used to
FRA
and what additional process
Institute
participants; and benchmarking against best
improve the SLSI program and the overall
improvements can SLSI implement
practices identified in literature review.
safety culture of short line railroads.
to strengthen its training program?
Outcome Evaluation: Pre-post analysis of
Do SLSI's Safety Culture
Safety Culture Assessment findings and
Assessments result in measurable
opportunities, survey responses for a
safety culture improvements for
sample of short line railroads, and interviews
participating railroads?
with SLSI staff to validate findings from
analysis.
FRA intends to examine a series of
questions to determine the
Results from this evaluation will be published
effectiveness of the Confidential
Potential methods include surveys,
in a report and presented to stakeholders. The
Confidential Close
Close Call Reporting System (C3RS)
interviews and focus groups, document
results can be used to adjust the operation of
FRA
Call Reporting
program, including:
reviews, data analysis (statistical and
the reporting program and collaboration with
System
What are the strengths and
qualitative), and observations.
participating stakeholders to improve their
weaknesses in the C3RS
use of this source of safety information.
implementation phase (e.g., initial
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
17
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
briefing, training, rollout), from the
end user perspective?
What are the strengths and
weaknesses in the C3RS post-
implementation phase (after initial
rollout), from the end user
perspective?
How useful are the products
delivered by the National
Aeronautics and Space
Administrations (e.g., de-identified
reports, portal, safety alerts,
quarterly briefings, special studies,
etc.)?
What modifications to the
Implementing Memorandum of
Understanding process are needed
(if any) to sustain and grow C3RS
in a post-pilot era?
What are the barriers to railroad
buy-in of the C3RS program and
reporting of close calls?
Is the C3RS program achieving its
stated objectives?
Is the C3RS program having an
effect on safety outcomes for
participating railroads (i.e., is the
program effective)?
The IIJA directs the Department to develop
two pipelines of intercity passenger rail
corridors/projects to guide long-term
Intercity Passenger
planning, project development, and
The project inventories will be submitted to
Rail
What intercity passenger rail
investment. The first pipeline of projects is
Congress and used to guide intercity
FRA
Corridor/Project
corridors and projects are ready for
specific to the Northeast Corridor (NEC)
passenger rail investment decisions by the
Pipeline
investment?
and intended to assist NEC states and
Department.
Development
commuter rail agencies, Amtrak, and the
public with long-term capital planning to
deliver the NEC Commission's consensus
Connect 2035 plan. This NEC project
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
18
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
inventory will help to sequence the order in
which projects will receive funding under
the Federal-State Partnership for State of
Good Repair grant program's allocation for
NEC projects.
The second pipeline is intended to facilitate
the development of intercity passenger rail
corridors across the country. The new
Corridor Identification and Development
Program will establish a process for eligible
entities to submit proposals to partner with
the Department to create service
development plans for new or improved
corridor services. This pipeline will also help
to prioritize capital project investment under
FRA's competitive grant funding.
FRA grantees are instructed to follow the
Department's Benefit-Cost Analysis
Guidance for Discretionary Grant Programs
when preparing benefit-cost analyses
related to grant program applications. FRA
economists review the applicant's
FRA will use benefit-cost analyses to
What are the costs and benefits
submission to assess the benefit-cost
Discretionary Grant
systematically identify, quantify, and compare
FRA
associated FRA's proposed grant
analysis for several factors (such as the
Programs
the expected benefits and costs of potential
investments?
reasonableness of applicant's assumptions
infrastructure projects.
and the transparency of the analysis) and
recommend adjustments based on
corrections for any technical errors, applying
alternative assumptions, or the
consideration of benefits and costs that may
have been omitted or are unquantified.
For every rulemaking, FRA develops an
Summary cost and benefit information is
economic analysis that reviews the costs
contained in the rulemaking and
What are the costs and benefits
and benefits associated with a proposed
accompanying Federal Register notice.
FRA
FRA Rulemakings
associated with FRA's proposed
rule. FRA estimates costs by engaging with
Detailed information is contained in the rule's
rulemakings?
stakeholders, researching relevant topics,
Regulatory Impact Analysis, which is in the
and incorporating subject matter experts.
public docket established for the rulemaking.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
19
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
To further support these rulemakings, FRA
determines potential benefits by reviewing
historical accident/incident and operational
data gathered from railroads, as well as
conducting risk analyses to capture potential
risks that may not have resulted in an
accident or incident. FRA also relies on peer
reviewed economic papers to determine the
effectiveness rate of the mitigation efforts of
the proposed or final rule.
How can FTA leverage lessons
learned from the implementation of
FTA will review lessons learned from the
FTA will use the lessons learned to revise the
Safety Risk
the first four topics evaluated under
first four topics evaluated under the SRM
FTA
Standard Operating Procedure for the SRM
Management
the Safety Risk Management (SRM)
process, including the Inward- and
process.
process to enhance effectiveness and
Outward-Facing Cameras safety topic.
timeliness?
Methodologies will include:
To what extent can FTA increase the
Literature reviews within and outside the
adoption of innovative or effective
transit industry to identify research-to-
practices based on its funded
practice methods that are effective in
FTA will use the findings to implement
research across the public transit
FTA Research
spurring adoption of research innovations
innovative research-to-practice strategies
industry?
Activities -
within transit systems;
across the public transit industry. FTA will
FTA
Innovative Public
Written report documenting
also develop an ongoing communications and
What are the best communication
Transit Solutions
recommendations;
outreach strategy to capture and share useful
methods for sharing the results of
Assessment of the level of adoption for
best practices.
FTA's vast portfolio of past research
specific innovative technologies; and
with public transportation
Development of an implementation plan
professionals?
for research-to-practice activities.
The before-and-after studies compare
FTA uses the findings to improve methods for
To what extent did the predicted
predicted versus actual values for capital
estimating capital costs, forecasting ridership,
construction costs, service levels,
cost and ridership for a set of transit projects
project risk assessment, and to maintain
project scope, and ridership of a
that meet specified project criteria.
proactive oversight of projects. FTA publishes
Capital Investment
transit project receiving major capital
FTA
Predicted construction costs are calculated
a formal before-and-after study on its public-
Grants
project funding from FTA match the
by project sponsors using Year of
facing website comparing capital cost and
actual construction costs, service
Expenditure dollars and standardized using
ridership for the set of all rated Capital
levels, project scope, and ridership?
a template developed by FTA. Actual capital
Investment Grant projects periodically (most
costs are determined when construction is
recently in FY 2020). FTA also provides a
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
20
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
In cases where the predicted and
complete. Predicted ridership is calculated
before-and-after study report to Congress
actuals do not match, what are
by project sponsors using opening year
annually. Finally, FTA publishes individual
causal factors for the differences?
ridership forecast methodology that is
before-and-after project reports on its public-
reviewed and validated by FTA. Actual
facing website for projects with more than
ridership is calculated by sponsors using on-
$300 million total cost or more than $100
board rider surveys at times and locations
million FTA-funded cost.
most representative of typical travel patterns
and is conducted two years after the project
opens to allow the ridership market to
mature.
FTA plans to develop an equity
performance measure for the transit
FTA will fully develop National Transit Map,
sector that would involve a survey of
a nationwide map of fixed routes and
transit agencies. FTA first needs to
schedules based on General Transit Feed
identify the survey population
Specification data to include transit
Performance
(transit providers), collect data on
agencies' geographic coverage areas. Future
FTA plans to use the information for
FTA
Measurement of
their associated geographic coverage
activities will include integrating U.S.
performance planning and reporting and
Equity in Transit
areas, and link that data with U.S.
Census demographic data. Once sufficient
management decision-making.
Census demographic data to identify
transit agency participation in the National
geographic areas that are
Transit Map is achieved, FTA plans to
"underserved" in terms of transit
survey transit agencies to collect data that
services (to develop a proxy measure
will be used to assess equity issues.
for equity).
FTA has identified a broad portfolio
of research questions related to the
effectiveness of its Transit Asset
Management program following the
final rulemaking, including:
Has the rule changed asset
Methodologies include transit agency
management practices in the
interviews, focus groups, asset inventory
Transit Asset
transit industry?
FTA will use the results to respond to audit
analysis from transit agency reporting
FTA
Management
Has the rule contributed towards
recommendations and determine future
(institutional data), surveys of relevant FTA
Program
reducing the state of good repair
program development.
staff, and qualitative analysis of Agency
backlog?
narrative reports.
Have the requirements for a TAM
plan and performance targets led to
improved outcomes in safety, service
reliability, maintenance costs, and
system performance?
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
21
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
Findings will inform development of
functional training to provide mariners with
How can standardization and
This study will focus on the skills needed in
an understanding of today's threats and
resiliency of the commercial fleet
the workforce to recognize and counter
vulnerabilities for sealift vessels, addressing
support operations in a contested
activity meant to constrain the U.S. ability to
Government Accountability Office and
Sealift Contested
environment, including approaches
deploy military forces and engage in
Inspector General reporting on the need for
MARAD
Environment
to educate and increase mariner
maritime commerce. The full scope of the
training mariners for contested environment
Assessment
skills and necessary tools and
study will include analysis and update of
operations. This effort can support improved
outfitting for U.S. companies, to
previous training curriculum, instruction on
efficiencies by identifying infrastructure and
compete in operations short of war in
new capabilities, tactics, and procedures,
personnel requirements, while documenting
unstable international waters?
with an eye on safety.
how standardization and alignment efforts
can improve overall program management for
the most active fleet facilities and anchorages.
This will assess the sufficiency and
resiliency of infrastructure, personnel safety,
and resourcing methods to guide
investments, capital improvements or even
All assessment data will be incorporated into
guide reductions in capabilities, where
the Geographical Information System
Are the three existing National
National Defense
demand has decreased over time. The study
platform utilized by the Agency and the
Defense Reserve Fleet facilities and
Reserve Fleet
will include projections of future
Department. Performance measures will be
MARAD
anchorages, and Ready Reserve
Resiliency
requirements for fleet and anchorage
developed to gauge effective resource
Fleet (RRF) resources being utilized
Evaluation
services over the next 25 years. Additionally,
utilization, to inform Agency strategic
effectively?
the assessment will look at resiliency
planning, and to provide Departmental
measures to improve day-to-day readiness
reporting on effectiveness.
of the RRF and document sustainability
initiatives for more effective utilization of
resources.
Assess the current material condition of
TSSOM and look at the effects of casualties
What fleetwide upgrades and
suffered over the last ten years onboard the
Training Ship State
Information will be used to project major
requirements are needed for the
vessel, and another vessel of the same class,
of Michigan and
repairs, modifications, and fleetwide upgrades
Training Ship State of Michigan
TS General Rudder. Equipment and systems
Maritime Training
needed in the next five years to improve
MARAD
(TSSOM) to prevent interruption of
will be evaluated according to the hierarchy
Platform
reliability and safety. This assessment will
training cruises, including fleetwide
recorded in the fleetwide, Nautical Systems
Requirements
also document baseline requirements for the
upgrades necessary to improve
Enterprise application. Additionally, the
Assessment
maritime training platform needed at GLMA.
reliability and safety of the fleet?
assessment will document and record
stakeholder concerns for platform or
capability expansion and detail the scope of
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
22
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
future changes in berthing arrangements,
equipment integration, and operating
procedures that would improve maritime
training delivery or cadet throughput. This
assessment will involve close engagement
with stakeholders at Great Lakes Maritime
Academy (GLMA) to identify maritime
training platform requirements unique to
vessels and mariner training on the U.S.
Great Lakes.
How can we quantify what benefits
or impediments of current
Assessment of the
processes and infrastructure in the
Interrelationship
maritime industry have on the
Leverage existing products and work in the
Between the
overall supply chain?
area of freight fluidity to serve as a basis for
The end product will be used as a basis for
measuring impacts. This would also
targeting support for infrastructure
MARAD
Maritime Industry
What effect do the benefits or
incorporate work being conducted on data
investment that supports resiliency and
and the Other
impediments of other supply
and information sharing within DOT and
sustainability in the entire supply chain.
Industries in the
industries have on the maritime
across Federal agencies.
Supply Chain
industry? (e.g., warehousing,
manufacturing, rail, truck,
ecommerce, etc.).
This assessment would look at existing
What are the advantages and
mechanisms in the public and private sector
disadvantages of ports to nearby
for measuring carbon emissions and their
communities?
impacts (e.g., healthcare costs, life-
What are the economic
expectancy, etc.) can affect the well-being
advantages by employing
of a community across different
Assessment of
community members relative to
demographic groups at ports in different
This information will be used to develop a
Equity Impacts
the disadvantages caused by
regions. It will attempt to weigh imbalances
maritime related framework to measure
MARAD
Related to the
harmful emissions and light
in equity at ports in different regions
equitable outcomes for communities affected
Maritime Port
pollution?
recognizing that levels of inequity among
by ports versus communities without nearby
Sector
different groups are not the same across all
ports.
How does this affect homebuyer
regions and ascertain whether a national-
rates/turnover and the local
level metric could be established. It will also
economy?
look into how these high traffic ports could
To what extent are benefits and
create negative externalities to the
negative impacts distributed
community beyond health, such financial
return on long term asset retention (e.g.,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
23
Mode
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question(s)
Brief Summary of Methods
Use and Dissemination of Findings
differently across different
home owning in these communities).
population groups?
Additionally, it will take into consideration
the possible economic benefits related to
How do we address differences in
employment in local communities, and
equity across different
where coordination needs to be
demographic groups and regions?
strengthened across equity hiring programs.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION |
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
24
