ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 1 of 9
U.S. Department of Education Evaluation Policy
Introduction
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (the Evidence Act) and
subsequent guidance from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) require
agencies to establish and implement an agency-wide policy governing the design and
conduct of evaluations. 1,2 At the Department of Education (ED), evaluations include, but
are not limited to, efforts that are designed to rigorously test the efficacy or effectiveness
of education policies, programs, or practices (impact evaluations) and those that describe
how those policies, programs, or practices operate in classrooms, schools, and
communities (implementation evaluations).
Consistent with the Evidence Act and OMB guidance, this policy outlines the key
principles that guide ED's planning and conduct of its own evaluations. These principles
should inform, but do not govern, evaluations undertaken by ED grantees of their own
projects.
ED undertakes evaluations so that it can better meet its mission of promoting student
achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational
excellence and ensuring equal access. Evaluation findings build knowledge critical to the
development of education as a field and serve as an important source of information for
ED's own organizational learning and improvement. Taken together, these activities
contribute to a larger goal of improved outcomes for all learners.
Program evaluations are only one source of evidence used by ED to support decision-
making. Thoughtful and rigorous policy analysis, statistical data collections, foundational
fact finding, and programmatic oversight activities such as performance measurement
and monitoring can also yield high-quality evidence that may be used to promote
mission-strategic and agency-operational improvement.²
Evidence-building and its use at ED is a shared responsibility. Every ED principal
operating component (POC) is expected to use the best-available evidence in the conduct
1 See 5 USC § 312.
2
See OMB Memorandum M-20-12, available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/M-20-12.pdi
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 2 of 9
of its work. Each POC should consider how its programs, policies, and practices-
including those supported through grants and contracts-could be structured to build
evidence to strengthen those activities in the future. However, no office is expected to
undertake evidence-building and use alone. ED leverages both POC-specific expertise as
well as agency-wide collaborations to develop and support the application and use of
evidence in implementing its mission of educational excellence and equity.
The Institute of Education Sciences' (IES') National Center for Education Evaluation and
Regional Assistance (NCEE) contributes to these efforts through the design and
execution of rigorous program evaluations and the dissemination of evaluation findings.
Congress established IES and NCEE as part of the Education Sciences Reform Act of
2002 (ESRA; Pub. L. 107-279), directing NCEE to "conduct evaluations of Federal
education programs administered by the Secretary to determine the impact of such
programs."3 When NCEE is not directly sponsoring an evaluation, it fulfills its statutory
mission by examining "evaluations conducted or supported by others in order to
determine the quality and relevance of the evidence of effectiveness generated by those
evaluations. ",4 Through ESRA, Congress set high standards for the independence,
relevance, quality, transparency, and ethics of IES evaluation activities-standards that
are mirrored in OMB's guidance on program evaluation standards and practices. 5
This policy affirms ED's commitment to the foundational principles identified in OMB
guidance on program evaluation: independence and objectivity, relevance and utility,
rigor and quality, transparency, and ethics. The policy also describes how those principles
are implemented in NCEE evaluation activities.
Independence and Objectivity
If stakeholders are to use evaluations to inform their decision-making, they must view
evaluation findings as trustworthy. IES's autonomy confers significant benefit to the
Department, helping to earn and maintain public trust in the credibility of ED evaluation
3
See 20 USC § 9561(b)(2)
4 See 20 USC § 9563(a)(1)(E).
5 See OMB Memorandum M-20-12, available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/M-20-12.pdf
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 3 of 9
findings.
NCEE makes full and routine use of the autonomy granted IES and takes added steps to
protect independence and objectivity in the design, conduct, analysis, and reporting of its
evaluations by:
Competitively awarding evaluation contracts to experts external to ED who are
free from conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise.
Consistent with ESRA, conditioning the release of evaluation reports only on
approval from the IES Standards and Review Office (SRO), rather than the
approval of the Secretary or any other ED office. 6 ESRA requires that IES
evaluation reports are subjected to rigorous peer review before being released
to
the public. SRO, which is independent of NCEE, oversees the scientific peer-
review process. It seeks to ensure that IES reports are not only of high scientific
merit8 but also objective, secular, neutral, and non-ideological, as well as free
of partisan political influence and racial, cultural, gender, or regional bias.9
Releasing all reports to the public as soon as practical once approved by the
SRO, irrespective of other ED or Executive Branch activities.
Relevance and Utility
In order to be useful, evaluation findings must be relevant to the interests and needs of
ED and program leadership and staff; agency partners such as States, territories, tribes,
and grantees; Federal, State, and school district policymakers; legislators and regulators;
school boards and community organizations; parents and families; and other interested
audiences.
While remaining fully committed to the autonomy granted to it by ESRA, NCEE seeks to
ensure the relevance of ED evaluations by:
Building strong partnerships with policy and program leaders to: create
6
See 20 USC § 9576(a)
7
See 20 USC § 9576(c)
8 See 20 USC § 9563
9
See 20 USC § 9514
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 4 of 9
opportunities to identify evaluation topics and questions of importance; provide
periodic progress updates while the evaluation is underway and opportunities to
participate in Technical Working Groups (TWGs); share insights and interim
findings from evolving research as it is undertaken, subject to the
considerations below; inform policy and program leaders about final findings
once the evaluation is completed; and understand effective mechanisms for
sharing findings with interested stakeholders outside of ED.
Ensuring that evaluation activities are prioritized in a manner consistent with
the ED's Learning Agenda and considering: congressional requirements; the
President's and Secretary's budget and policy priorities; State, district, and
local needs as identified by ED staff; the evaluability of a program or overall
feasibility of the evaluation effort; and how recently a program's last evaluation
occurred.
Reviewing the literature, consulting with experts, and seeking the input of key
education stakeholders so that evaluations can generate relevant evidence for
audiences both inside and outside of the Department.
Ensuring that all evaluations are conducted in a timely manner and findings are
reported promptly, without sacrificing quality.
Ensuring that the products developed as part of an evaluation activity are
responsive to the information needs and communication preferences of key
stakeholders.
Considerations for Sharing Interim Findings from Evaluation Studies with ED Staff
Consistent with its goal to ensure evaluation findings are both relevant and timely, NCEE
will share selected interim findings from evaluation activities when doing so could
inform specific deliberations (e.g., grant competition design, budget policy, regulatory
development, legislative proposals). To ensure standards of quality and rigor (below) are
upheld, NCEE will only share interim findings based on completed data collections and
analyses that have been subject to internal quality assurance procedures.
To maximize efficiency, NCEE will share such interim findings during regularly
scheduled program briefings with policy and program leaders and may also be limited by
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 5 of 9
available staff and contractor resources. Interim findings will also be shared at regularly
scheduled TWGs, to which program leaders are typically invited. All interim findings
must be accompanied by a statement from NCEE indicating their scientifically
appropriate and inappropriate uses, including the risk that findings may materially change
prior to publication.
ESRA requires peer-review of evaluation studies and Secretarial notification before
findings are shared with the public. ED staff may not redistribute any interim findings
received from NCEE for any purpose.
Rigor and Quality
NCEE adheres to the highest possible standards of rigor and quality for conducting
evaluations so that stakeholders can rely upon their findings. Because quality standards
change over time as evaluation science and statistical practice evolves, IES promulgates
guidelines and other standard operating procedures to ensure NCEE's evaluation work
consistently reflects best practice among Federal evaluators.
ED expects all impact evaluations will be designed to meet What Works ClearinghouseTM
standards, either with or without reservations. NCEE may also require evaluations to
meet additional ED guidelines related to information quality, such as those required by
the Information Quality Act. 10
The standards below apply to all types of evaluation. They are applicable to all stages of
an evaluation, including design, data collection, data analysis, and reporting of results.
When an evaluation seeks to answer questions about the effectiveness of a
policy, program, or practice, NCEE strongly prefers experimental designs. 11
The design of both impact and implementation evaluations and planned
analyses must be aligned with the research questions of interest to yield
credible findings.
NCEE recruits and maintains an evaluation workforce with training and
10 See the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act of 2001 (Pub. L. 106-554, § 515(a)), as
codified at 44 USC § $3504 (d) and 3516.
11 See 20 USC § 9563(a)(2)(A)
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 6 of 9
experience appropriate for planning and overseeing a portfolio of high-quality
evaluations. NCEE staff have relevant advanced degrees and experience in a
range of relevant disciplines and content areas, and NCEE leadership assigns
staff to evaluations that best fit their areas of expertise. NCEE provides
professional development opportunities so that staff are current with
methodological advances and research in their content areas.
NCEE ensures that contractors who conduct evaluations have the expertise
needed to perform high-quality work. As part of the procurement process,
NCEE first specifies requirements for contractor expertise designed to ensure a
rigorous evaluation and then assesses the technical merit of proposals to ensure
that well-qualified contractors are selected. NCEE staff closely oversee the
entirety of the evaluation and supply technical direction to contractors on a
frequent basis.
NCEE convenes a TWG for each evaluation it conducts. Members include
leading experts from both inside and outside government with relevant subject-
matter, methodological, and practice expertise. TWGs supply periodic guidance
to NCEE staff and the contractor during the design, analysis, and reporting
phases of the evaluation.
As required by ESRA, evaluation reports are subjected to a rigorous peer-
review process before being published or otherwise released to the public. The
peer-review process ensures that all reports are thoroughly vetted by scientific
experts for scientific merit before publication. Procedures for peer review of
reports are approved by IES's board, the National Board for Education
Sciences.
Considerations for Evidence-Building Conducted by ED Program Participants
When possible, ED will require grantees (including through cooperative agreements) and
contractors to conduct or commission rigorous evaluations of their activities and report
their findings to ED and the public. A recent example is the Office of Elementary and
Secondary Education's Education Innovation and Research (EIR) program and the
development of "exit evidence" at the conclusion of the grant period.
Where appropriate, ED expects these evaluations to also meet What Works
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 7 of 9
Clearinghouse TM standards, with or without reservations. Inclusion in the Clearinghouse
helps ensure that what is learned in an evaluation can benefit the field. However, program
offices must consider their capacity to provide or support grantee technical assistance
before requiring evaluation activities.
When the capacity to support rigorous evaluation does not exist, program offices should
consider requiring grantees to conduct other evidence-building activities. These could
include, but are not limited to, participation in rigorous performance monitoring and
improvement activities or the collection of institution-level or student-level data to
demonstrate the association between program participation and important program
outcomes.
Transparency
ED promotes transparency of its evaluation work throughout a project's lifecycle.
First, consistent with the Paperwork Reduction Act, NCEE files Information Collection
Requests with OMB and publishes the same in the Federal Register. These filings include
information about an evaluation's purpose and benefits to stakeholders, as well as key
statistical and operational details concerning how ED will conduct the evaluation.
Second, NCEE pre-registers analysis plans for all impact evaluations. Examples of study
registries include the Registry of Efficacy and Effectiveness Studies, maintained by the
University of Michigan's Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Finally, NCEE releases all evaluation reports as soon as practical to ensure that
government leaders and the public have access to completed evaluations. Each report
includes a full accounting of data collection and analysis activities. NCEE posts final
evaluation reports to the IES website and deposits them in the Education Resources
Information Center, IES's online database of education research, to ensure that they are
permanently available to the public.
NCEE also posts brief profiles of ongoing and recently completed evaluations on its
website. The profiles provide pertinent information about each evaluation, such as its
cost, anticipated timeline, background and purpose, evaluation questions, methods, data
collection, and key findings. ED includes similar information in its Annual Performance
Report. Findings from NCEE evaluations are also regularly shared via social media,
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 8 of 9
presented at conferences, and otherwise made available to relevant stakeholders.
Consistent with ESRA's requirement for data availability, 12 NCEE makes the data from
its evaluations available to qualified individuals for the purpose of reproducibility and
secondary analysis via the IES Restricted Use Data Licensing Program, maintained by
the National Center for Education Statistics. NCEE adheres to all applicable laws that
protect the confidentiality and privacy of education data, including the requirements
explicitly set forth in ESRA. 13
ED is also transparent about this evaluation policy and its efforts to collect and use high-
quality data and evidence of all kinds. This and other relevant policies, including ED's
Information Quality Act Guidelines, are made available on ED's websites. As part of the
assessment required by the Evidence Act, ED staff regularly review their consistent
adherence to ED's evaluation policy and other guidelines on evidence-building and use.
Ethics
ED and contractor staff who oversee scientific activities have a responsibility to behave
in an ethical manner and to safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of study
participants. These responsibilities are outlined in ED's Scientific Integrity Policy, to
which all ED staff are expected to adhere. 14 An important component of those safeguards
is the development and use of high-quality data management practices that ensure the
collection, processing, storage, and dissemination of data and data products are
appropriate. NCEE routinely collaborates with colleagues across ED, including those
with responsibilities for information security, student privacy, and data governance, to
design work that complies with all applicable law and policy.
ESRA places special emphasis on protecting the confidentiality of individually
identifiable information about students, families, and schools (Sec. 182-183). Other
Federal laws, such as the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act and the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act, similarly protect the privacy of student education
12 See 20 USC § 9574.
13 See 20 USC § 9573.
14 For more information on the Department's policy, see https://ies.ed.gov/aboutus/scientific integrity.asp.
ED Evaluation Policy
August 12, 2020
Page 9 of 9
records. 15 IES evaluations comply with these laws, as well as other relevant
requirements, such as regulations governing the Protection of Human Subjects (34 C.F.R.
Part 97) and the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment (PPRA; 34 C.F.R. Part 98).
15 For more information on FERPA, see https://www2.ed.gov/ferpa.
