U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-
Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning
Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
OF
STATES
January 2022
Office of the Chief Financial Officer (CF)
U.S. Department of Energy
This page is intentionally left blank.
Table of Contents
1.
Introduction
1
2.
Strategic Plan
3
2.1
Learning Agenda Activities for FY 2023
3
3.
Program Evaluation Methodologies
4
4.
Strategic Review
6
5.
Performance Evaluation Information
8
6.
National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA)
8
7.
Office of Science (SC)
11
7.1
Office of Project Assessment
11
7.2
Laboratory Appraisal Process
12
7.3
Other SC Programs
14
8.
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE)
15
9.
Office of Electricity (OE)
17
10.
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER)
18
11.
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM)
20
12.
Office of Nuclear Energy (NE)
20
13.
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E)
23
14.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)
26
15.
Loan Programs Office (LPO)
28
16.
Office of Environmental Management (EM)
29
17.
Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
32
18.
Power Marketing Administrations
32
18.1
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA)
33
18.2
Southeastern Power Administration (SEPA)
34
18.3
Southwestern Power Administration (SWPA)
34
18.4
Western Area Power Administration (WAPA)
34
19.
Departmental Administration
35
19.1
Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs (CI)
35
19.2
Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
36
19.3
Office of Economic Impact and Diversity (ED)
38
19.4
Office of International Affairs (IA)
39
19.5
Artificial Intelligence & Technology Office (AITO)
40
1
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, and Learning Agenda
19.6
Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
41
19.7
Office of Management (MA)
42
19.8
Office of Project Management
49
19.9
Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO)
50
19.10
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU)
56
19.11
Office of General Counsel (GC)
57
19.12
Office of Policy (OP)
58
19.13
Office of Public Affairs (PA)
61
19.14
Office of Technology Transitions (OTT)
61
20.
Other Defense Activities
64
20.1
Office of Environment, Health, Safety, and Security (AU)
64
20.2
Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA)
66
20.3
Office of Legacy Management (LM)
67
20.4
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (IN)
68
21.
Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs (IE)
68
21.1
Arctic Energy Office (AEO)
69
Appendix A.
Evaluation, Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis Sources
A-1
Appendix B.
DOE Learning Agenda
B-1
Appendix C.
DOE Capacity Assessment of Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and AnalysisC-1
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, and Learning Agenda
1.
Introduction
This paper provides the Department's approach to evaluation and evidence-building to improve
performance across the broad range of the Department's program and functional offices. This
documents the Department's means for making available to the public the wide range of
information concerning the Department's broad range of programs. The implementation of
evaluation and evidence-building actions (i.e., statistics, research, studies, and analysis) is
imbedded as part of the planning and execution efforts of each of the program and functional
offices. This paper also discusses the methodologies currently used across the Department for
evaluation and evidence-building. These different methodologies reflect the broad diversity in
programs' missions and functional office responsibilities.
Given the variety of DOE activities the Department relies on Program Managers to accomplish
program management objectives and related evaluation requirements. Program Managers tailor
program strategies and oversight, including documentation of program information, program
phases, the timing and scope of decision reviews and decision levels, to fit the particular
conditions of that program, consistent with applicable laws and regulations and the time
sensitivity of the capability need.¹
DOE Portfolios and Programs utilize a tailored management approach based on program
complexity2 This tailored approach to program management is based on risk and complexity of
the program and, if needed, definition of different program categories to address risk and
complexity. DOE programs cover a wide spectrum (ranging from nuclear security to research
and development to building weatherization).
Based on this broad spectrum of programs, the broad range of players (DOE, other Federal
agencies, national laboratories, universities, private sector, general public, international) and the
myriad of interests, the Department invests significant emphasis and resources in making the
Department's activities available through an extensive network of publicly accessible websites,
document archives, budget allocations, performance results, etc. The Department's functional
offices (CFO, Procurement, Project Assessment, Enterprise Assessment, etc.) also have
extensive websites which make their activities available to the general public.
DOE's goal is to establish Program Management guidance that addresses the following
attributes:3
Tailored and Flexible - Program management approaches are based on program
1
NNSA Policy 413.2, Program Management Policy, page 1: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy.
documents/nap-0413-002/@@images/file
2 DOE Policy (P) 410.3, Program Management: https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/400-
series/0410-3-apolicy
3 NNSA Policy 413.2, Program Management Policy, Page 4: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy.
documents/nap-0413-002/@@images/file
1
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
complexity and the particular conditions related to that program
Streamlined and Effective Management - Program responsibility should be decentralized
when practicable and use a streamlined management structure during program execution,
characterized by short, clearly defined lines of responsibility, authority, and
accountability.
Responsive and Cost-Effective - Programs should utilize an approach that aligns
capability with available technology and resources to satisfy operational needs, while
recognizing fiscal constraints.
Cross-program coordination where appropriate - in support of agency-wide improvement
efforts, cross-agency goals and standards will be established when beneficial.
This paper is based on open-source research using information available on Department of
Energy (DOE) websites as well as open-source platforms. Links to the websites of some of the
key program and functional offices are provided.
Also provided in this paper is the FY 2023 Evaluation Plan for several specific Learning Agenda
efforts the Department plans to pursue. For information concerning the more detailed evaluation
and evidence building efforts by each of the program and functional offices for enhancement of
their knowledge base and to inform decision makers, refer to the websites for each of the
program offices and functional offices.
The following figure reflects the Department's headquarters and field offices, as well as the
national laboratories.
2
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Figure 1: DOE Locations
AL
Arctic Energy Operations Office
Pacific Northwest
Site Office
Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory
River Protection Project
Columbus Environmental Schenectady Naval
WA
Miamisburg
Management Project
Reactors Office
Closure
Hanford
Project
Portsmouth
Richland
MT
Gaseous
Operations Office
Diffusion
Knolls Atomic
Bonneville
Plant
Power Laboratory
ME
ND
Power Administration
Idaho National
Ohio
OR
Laboratory
MN
Field
West Valley
National Energy
ID
Formi
Office
Demonstration
VT/
Northeast Home Heating
NH
Technology Laboratory
National
Project
Oil Reserves
(Oregon)
Radiological
Accelerator
Environmental
|Laboratory
MI
Pittsburgh
SD
Sciences
Idaho
Naval
MA
New
Laboratory
Operations
Naval Petroleum
WI
Berkeley
Office
Reserve3 B
Brunswick
Reactors)
NY
CT
RI
CA
Site Office
Laboratory
Office
Brookhaven Site Office
PA
Lawrence Berkeley
WY
Ames
Chicagó Operations Office
Bettis Atomic
(NJ
Brookhaven National Laboratory
National Laboratory
Yucca
Laboratory
Power Laboratory "Princeton Site Office
NV
NE
IN
Lawrence Livermore
IA
OH
Mountain
National Energy, Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
Nevada
UT
Western Area Power Administration
Fermi
Argonne
va
Technology Laboratory -Pittsburgh
National Laboratory
Site
Test Site
Livermore
Rocky Flats
MO
National
DE
YuccalMountain
Field Office
Office
Fernald
Site Offices
Grand
.
Kansas
Laboratory
National'Enerdy
EM
Techprology
Washington Headquarters
Nevada
Préject Office
Junction
Golden
Stanford Linear
Office
Field Office
City Plant
Accelerator Center
Site Office
Consolidated WVLaboratory
CO
National Renewable
Business Center
Morgantown
KS
Thomas Jefferson
Stanford Linear
Site Offices,
VA
Site Offices
Energy Laboratory
National Accelerator Facility
KY
Los Alamos National
Southwestern
Paducah Gaseous/C
Power Administration
Diffusion Plant
NC
Y-12 Plant
Laboratory
Oak Ridge
Sandia National
Y-12 Site Office
Laboratories
Los Alamos National
OK
Operations Office
Site Office
National Energy
TN
SC
Oak Ridge
Sandia National
Savannah
Energy Technology
AZ
AR
National
NNSA
Laboratories
Technology Laboratory
River Site Office
Laboratory
Engineering Center
Service
FSandia
Pantex (Tulsa)
Savannah River Operations Office
Center
Sito Office
Plant
NM
& Site
AL
Savannah River
Office
GA
National Laboratory
MS
LEGEND:
Office of Secure
Southeastern Power Administration
LA
Transportation
Waste Isolation
Operations Offices
Pilot Plant
TX
Strategic
Production/Cleanup
Inhalation Toxicology
Petroleum
Research Institute
Reservo
Laboratories
East Tennessee
Carlsbad Field
Technology
Field Offices
Portsmouth/Paducah
Office of
Office
Park
Project Office
Science &
Site or Project Offices
Technical
Special Purpose
Information
Update September, 2006
Sites/Offices
NOTE: Location within each state is not to scale
Power Administrations
NNSA Service Center
Washington D.C.
Headquarters
2.
Strategic Plan
Each of the program and functional offices are engaged in supporting strategic goals. DOE is
preparing a new Strategic Plan intended to cover FY 2022 - FY 2026. This Plan will include
Goals and Objectives for the Department; Offices will then develop specific milestones to meet
these. The requirements for this Plan are set in the Government Performance and Results Act
Modernization Act (GPRA-MA).
2.1
Learning Agenda Activities for FY 2023
The U.S. Department of Energy and its predecessor organizations have supported evidence-
building for the purpose of improving outcomes for more than 50 years. This work includes
rigorous implementation, outcome, and impact evaluations; grants to researchers for basic
science, applied research, and evidence synthesis; and data collection in support of official
statistics and performance improvement.
3
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
OMB Memoranda M-19-234 M-20-125, , and M-21-276 discuss the process of developing and
implementing a multi-year learning agenda that coincides with the four-year timeframe defined
for agency strategic plans.7 An agency learning agenda addresses priority questions (i.e.,
questions relevant for programmatic, operational, regulatory, or policy decision-making) across
the entire agency. 8
For FY 22, DOE is focused on the following four areas:
Optimizing Carry-Over Balances for DOE Program and Support Functions
Development of a Statistical Methodology Improvement Plan (SMIP)
Management of Procurement Systems to utilize DOE and NNSA Category
Management
Optimizing DOE Corporate Business Systems & Services for Cloud-Based Delivery
A detailed discussion of the learning agenda items is located at Appendix B: DOE Learning
Agenda.
3.
Program Evaluation Methodologies
Successful programs are essential to the effective accomplishment of the Department of Energy's
(DOE) strategic and operational goals. These programs are diverse and reflect the scope and
breadth of the Department's missions. These include (but are not limited to):
Research and Development (R&D), including Laboratory Directed Research and
Development9 (LDRD) Programs;
Environmental Management Programs;
Legacy Management Programs;
Nuclear Power Research and Development (including naval reactors);
Nuclear Weapons Research, Development, Production, and Oversight;
Energy Information Administration;
4 OMB Memorandum M-19-23, Phase 1 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp
 content/uploads/2019/07/M-19-23.pdf
5 OMB Memorandum M-20-12, Phase 4 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
of 2018: Program Evaluation Standards and Practices: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/M-
20-12.pdf
6 OMB Memorandum M-21-27, Evidence-Based Policymaking: Learning Agendas and Annual Evaluation Plans:
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/M-21-27.pdf
7
OMB Memorandum M-19-23, Phase 1 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/M-19-23.pdf
8
GSA Evidence Act Toolkit, A Guide to Developing Your Agency's Learning Agenda:
ttps://oes.gsa.gov/assets/toolkits/A_Guide to Developing Your Agency's Learning Agenda updated.pdf
9 DOE O 413.2C Laboratory Directed Research And Development: https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-
locuments/0413.2-BOrder-c-chgl-minchg/@@images/file
4
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Staff offices (e.g., Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), Office of the Chief
Information Officer (OCIO), etc.); and,
Capital Asset Programs10
Evaluation of programs is key for the DOE as it manages this myriad of dis-similar programs.
Program evaluation is a systematic assessment using quantitative and/or qualitative data and
analysis methods to answer specific questions about current or past programs, with the intent to
assess their effectiveness and efficiency11 Often, the term "program evaluation" and
"evaluation" are used synonymously. Evaluations include the following:
A systematic method for collecting, analyzing, and using information to answer questions
about projects, policies, and programs12 particularly about their effectiveness and
efficiency.
Systematic outcome and impact studies to assess whether a program is achieving its
goals, and why (or why not).
Periodic assessments of a program's progress, including process implementation studies
to determine where and how to make improvements, improve efficiencies, and ensure
that the program is running as planned.
Evaluation means "an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of one or more
programs, policies, and organizations intended to assess their effectiveness and efficiency." 13
Evaluation standards (from OMB M-20-13) 14 include the following:
Relevance and Utility - Evaluations must address questions of importance and serve the
information needs of stakeholders to be useful resources.
Rigor - Evaluations must produce findings that can be confidently relied upon, while
providing clear explanations of limitations.
Independence and Objectivity - Evaluations must be viewed as objective for
stakeholders, experts, and the public to accept their findings.
Transparency - Evaluations must be transparent in the planning, implementation, and
reporting phases to enable accountability and help ensure that aspects of an evaluation are
not tailored to generate specific findings.
Ethics - Evaluations must be conducted to the highest ethical standards.
10
DOE O 413.3B, Program and Project Management for the Acquisition of Capital Assets:
https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/400-series/0413.3-border-b-chg6-minchg
11 EERE Program Evaluation: https://www.energy.gov/eere/analysis/eere-program-evaluation
12
Administration for Children and Families (2010) The Program Manager's Guide to Evaluation. Chapter 2: What
is
program evaluation?
13 Evidence Act§ 101(e)(4)(B) (citing 5 U.S.C. § 311(3)), Public law 115-435, January 14, 2019:
  https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ435/PLAW-115publ435.pdf
14
OMB Memorandum M-20-13, Phase 4 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
of 2018: Program Evaluation Standards and Practices, page 4: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/M-20-12.pdf
5
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
As a tool to support good management practice, evaluation helps inform key planning and
budget decisions and enables managers to determine if adjustments are needed in program design
to improve the rate or quality of achievement relative to the committed resources. Evaluations
also help programs quantify achieved impacts. While program evaluation first focuses on this
definition, important considerations15 often include:
Program costs;
Potential program improvements;
Determining whether it is worthwhile to continue with the program;
Identifying better alternatives, if there are unintended outcomes; and,
Verifying whether program goals are appropriate and useful.
Methodologies used at the Department to evaluate programs and program performance include
examination of both objective and subjective information. These methodologies vary based on:
Office Standards and Requirements;
Organizational Mission/Requirements;
Implementation methodology (including contract type, grant, etc.); and,
Oversight requirements.
4.
Strategic Review
All agencies are required to conduct frequent data-driven performance reviews and strategic
reviews. All agencies must follow the public reporting guidelines defined for strategic plans,
Annual Performance Plans and Annual Performance Reports which will include a progress
update by strategic objective.
16
The strategic review serves as the agency's internal management process or set of processes
which provide for an annual assessment of progress being made to improve program outcomes,
assess whether the agency is using the best measures to identify progress on program outcomes,
and look at opportunities for productivity gains using a variety of analytical, research, and
evaluation methods to support the assessment.
The results of these reviews should inform many of the decision-making processes at the agency,
as well as decision-making by the agency's stakeholders. 17
The strategic review process, facilitated by the Office of the CFO (CF) and overseen by the
Department's Performance Improvement Officer (PIO), concludes with DOE leveraging the data
15 Social Science Research Network (SSRN), What is Program Evaluation?:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3060080
16
SECTION 270-Program and Project Management, OMB Circular No. A-11 (2020) Page 2 of Section 270:
www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/s270.pdf
17 SECTION 0-Performance and Strategic Reviews, OMB Circular No. A-11 (2020) Page 7 of Section 260:
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/5260.pdi
6
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
collected (documented in the Strategic Planning Budget Formulation Performance Management
(BFEM) system) and inputs provided by OMB to inform DOE's Budget Formulation.
Figure 2: DOE Performance Management Strategic Review Process
DOE Performance Management Strategic Review
6
OMB conducts review of
Strategic Review inputs
4
Chairs discussion at
Quarterly Performance
Review (QPR)
START
1
Requests input from Under Secretaries and
Assistant Secretaries via Data Call. Input
5
includes:
Develops input for OMB-
Status of performance measures
DOE Strategic Review
supporting strategic objectives
Meeting (June)
Narrative of accomplishments
Discussion of challenges affecting
strategic objective achievement
7
3
Uses results of DOE Performance
CF
CF summarizes information
Management Strategic Review as
END
and prepares Performance
input to Budget Formulation
Dashboard for S-2 Review
guidance and decision-making
2
Contributing Programs (to
Strategic Plan) respond to
Data Call, provide inputs to
CF
7
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
5.
Performance Evaluation Information
This paper presents the methodologies currently used across the Department. These different
methodologies reflect the broad diversity in programs and missions. This paper is based on
open-source research using information available on Department of Energy (DOE) websites as
well as some open-source platforms.
6.
National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA)
Major missions of the National Nuclear Security Administration include18:
Maintaining the Stockpile - NNSA ensures the United States maintains a safe, secure,
and reliable nuclear stockpile through the application of unparalleled science,
technology, engineering, and manufacturing.
Nonproliferation - NNSA works to prevent nuclear weapon proliferation and reduce the
threat of nuclear and radiological terrorism around the world. The agency endeavors to
prevent the development of nuclear weapons and the spread of materials or knowledge
needed to create them.
Counter-terrorism and Counter-proliferation - NNSA plays a key role in preventing,
countering, and responding to a terrorist or other adversary with a nuclear or radiological
device.
Powering the Nuclear Navy - NNSA provides militarily effective nuclear propulsion
plants and ensures their safe, reliable, and long-lived operation.
In support of these missions, the NNSA has established procedures to ensure that the planning,
programming, budgeting, and evaluation (PPBE) activities of the NNSA comply with sound
financial management principles, specifically to assess and determine whether progress has been
made toward achieving identified performance measures at multiple levels within the NNSA.
The Office of Cost Estimating and Program Evaluation (NA-1.3) provides the NNSA
Administrator with independent, data-driven analysis on all aspects of the Nuclear Security
Enterprise, leading to better mission planning and performance. Accurately estimating costs,
assessing alternatives, and evaluating NNSA's program performance are vital to national security
and the responsible expenditure of taxpayer dollars.19
The NNSA is responsible for eight (8) Government Owned, Contractor Operated (GOCO)
facilities and laboratories, including three (3) FFRDC national laboratories; all supported by
M&O Contracts:
Kansas City National Security Complex (KCP)
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) (FFRDC)
18
NNSA Missions: https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/missions
19
Office of Cost Estimating and program Evaluation: https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/nnsa-offices/supporting-nnsas
missions
8
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) (FFRDC) (also supported by the Office of
Environmental Management)
Savannah River Site (SRS) (FFRDC) (Operated in conjunction with the Office of
Environmental Management (EM))
Naval Nuclear Laboratory
Nevada National Security Site (NNSS)
NNSA Production Office (NPO) Pantex Plant and Y-12 National Security Complex
Sandia National Laboratory (SNL)
Every fiscal year, the NNSA completes an assessment of their management and operating
(M&O) partners' effectiveness in meeting the performance expectations as established by NNSA
in
NNSA NAP 540-3. 20 This assessment is based on an evaluation of the annual Performance
Evaluation and Measurement Plans (PEMPs) linked to each NNSA site. 21 NNSA performance
assessments are documented annually in a Performance Evaluation Report (PER), and award fee
amounts are documented in a Fee Determination Memorandum. 22 This involves assessment
against standardized strategic performance goals outlined in an annual PEMP for each M&O
Contract. For the period including Fiscal Years 2015-2020, The NNSA uses 6 standardized
performance evaluation goal areas as the basis for award fee determination, including the
following performance goals for each site (for FY 2020) 23.
1) Mission Execution: Nuclear Weapons
2) Mission Execution: Nuclear Security
3) DOE & Strategic Partnership Projects Mission Objectives
4) Science, Technology, & Engineering (STE)
5) Mission Enablement
6) Mission Leadership
These goals are refined annually in the PEMP for each location. Supplemental Award Fee
Definitions for NNSA Performance Evaluation and Master Plans (PEMP) are contained in NAP
54.3, Appendix I as discussed in Table 1:
20 NNSA Policy Letter NAP 540.3, Corporate Performance Evaluation Process for Management and Operating
Contractors: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy-documents/nap-0540-003
21NNSA releases performance evaluation summaries for contractors that run its labs, plants, and sites, February 6,
2020:
https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/articles/nnsa-releases-performance-evaluation-summaries-contractors-run-its-
labs-plants-and
22 NNSA releases Performance Evaluation Summary for Consolidated Nuclear Security, June 23, 2020:
//www.energy.gov/nnsa/articles/nnsa-releases-performance-evaluation-summary-consolidated-nuclear-security
23
NNSA releases 2020 performance evaluation summaries for contractors that run its labs, plants, and sites, January
14, 2021: ttps://www.energy.gov/nnsa/articles/nnsa-releases-2020-performance-evaluation-summaries-contractors-
run-its-labs-plants
9
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Table 1: Supplemental Definitions for FAR 16.401(e)(3) as used by NNSA24
Rating
%
Supplemental Award Fee Rating Definitions For NNSA
Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plan (PEMP)
Excellent
91-100%
Contractor has exceeded almost all the objectives and key outcomes under the
goals in the PEMP and has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate for the evaluation
period. This performance level is evidenced by at least one significant
accomplishment, or a combination of accomplishments that significantly
outweigh very minor issues, if any. No significant issues in performance exist.
Very Good
76-90%
Contractor has exceeded many of the objectives and key outcomes under the
goals in the PEMP and has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate for the evaluation
period. This performance level is evidenced by accomplishments that greatly
outweigh issues. No significant issues in performance exist.
Good
51-75%
Contractor has exceeded some of the objectives and key outcomes under the
goals in the PEMP and has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate for the evaluation
period. This performance level is evidenced by accomplishments that slightly
outweigh issues. No significant issues in performance exist.
Satisfactory
No
Contractor has met overall cost, schedule, and technical performance
Greater
requirements of the contract in the aggregate as defined and measured against
the objectives and key outcomes under the goals in the PEMP for the
than 50%
evaluation period. This performance level is evidenced by issues that slightly
outweigh accomplishments.
Unsatisfactory
0%
Contractor has failed to meet overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate as defined and
measured against the objectives and key outcomes under the goals in the
PEMP for the award-fee evaluation period. This performance level is
evidenced by issues that significantly outweigh accomplishments, if any.
The NNSA provides summary documents that feature easy-to-read and transparent assessment
scorecards for each lab and site assessment. The summaries include links to the corresponding
contract and the Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plan (PEMP). Performance
Evaluation Reports (PERs) provide a detailed summary report detailing the award fee (via a
scorecard) and providing specific comments against each performance objective/goal. Fee
determination memorandums including ratings earned in each of the Accomplishments and
issues for the six performance evaluation goals, at-risk fees available for each, and the final fees
awarded by goal are listed in each M&O summary. 25
24
NNSA Policy Letter NAP 540.3 Corporate Performance Evaluation Process for Management and Operating
Contractors, Appendix I: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy-documents/nap-0540-003/@@images/file
25 Contracts, modifications, and performance evaluations for NNSA's sites:
https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/leadership-and-offices/acquisition-and-project-management
10
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
7.
Office of Science (SC)
The Office of Science (SC) supports scientific research for energy and the physical sciences both
by directly supporting such research, for example, through grants to and cooperative agreements
with universities, and by supporting the development, construction, and operation of scientific
user facilities. The Office builds and maintain an array of large-scale scientific facilities at the
DOE national laboratories.26 This includes SC administering management and operating (M&O)
contracts at 10 national laboratory sites:
Indicate their websites
Ames Laboratory in Ames, Iowa (https://www.ameslab.gov/)
Argonne National Laboratory in Argonne, Illinois (https://www.anl.gov/)
Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York (https://www.bnl.gov/world/)
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Illinois (https://www.fnal.gov/)
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California (https://www.lbl.gov/)
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, in Oak Ridge, Tennessee (https://www.ornl.gov/)
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Washington (https://www.pnnl.gov/
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory in Princeton, New Jersey (https://www.pppl.gov/)
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory in Stanford, California
(https://www6.slac.stanford.edu/)
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Newport News, Virginia
(https://www.jlab.org/
The Office of Science is the nation's largest federal sponsor of basic research in the physical
sciences and has been a major supporter of research in such key scientific fields as physics,
materials science, and chemistry. The Office is also the lead federal agency supporting
fundamental scientific research related to energy and sponsors research at hundreds of
universities, national laboratories, and other institutions across the country.
Various methodologies are used by the Office of Science to evaluate programs. This includes
(but not limited to):
Office of Project Assessment
Laboratory Appraisal Process
Other SC Programs
7.1
Office of Project Assessment
The Office of Project Assessment provides independent advice to the Director of the Office of
Science (SC) relating to those activities essential to constructing and operating major research
26
Office of Science: https://www.energy.gov/science/mission
11
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
facilities. In addition, this office provides professional management and staff support regarding
these functions to SC program offices.
The primary responsibilities of the Office of Project Assessment are:27
Conducting technical, cost, schedule, and management peer reviews ("Lehman" reviews)
of SC construction projects and large experimental equipment;
Directing and supervising the development, initiation, and implementation of policies,
plans, and procedures for design, fabrication, construction, commissioning, operation and
decommissioning of research/conventional facilities and devices required to support the
SC program offices; and,
Representing the Director of Science in meetings with DOE, Office of Management and
Budget (OMB), Congress, and other oversight or investigatory bodies on all matters
involving the planning, design, construction, and operation of research facilities.
7.2
Laboratory Appraisal Process
SC stewards 10 of the 17 DOE National Laboratories, ranging from single-purpose laboratories
like Fermi lab to broad, multi-program laboratories such as Argonne. 28
The laboratories are managed and operated by Management and Operating (M&O) contracts,
which are characterized by their special purpose. 29 The work performed under M&O contracts
is
intimately related to DOE's mission, is of a long-term and continuing nature, and, among other
things, includes special requirements for work direction, safety, security, cost controls, and site
management.
The Office of Laboratory Policy coordinates the laboratory appraisal process 30 on
behalf of the
Director of the Office of Science. The laboratory appraisal process uses a common structure
and scoring system across all its Laboratories. Structured around eight Performance Goals, it
emphasizes the importance of delivering the science and technology necessary to meet the
missions of DOE; of operating the Laboratories in a safe, secure, responsible, and cost-effective
way; and of recognizing the leadership, stewardship and value-added provided by contractor
managing the Laboratory. The eight Performance Goals are³1:
27
Office of Science, Office of Project Management: https://www.energy.gov/science/mission/project-assessment-
opa
28 Office of Science, Laboratory Locations: https://www.energy.gov/science/science-innovation/office-science-
national-laboratories
29 M&O contracts are agreements under which the government contracts for the operation, maintenance, or support,
on its behalf, of a government-owned or -controlled research, development, special production, or testing
establishment wholly or principally devoted to one or more of the major programs of the contracting agency. See 48
C.F.R. § 17.601.
30
Office of Science Lab Appraisal Process: https://www.energy.gov/science/office-science-lab-appraisal-proces
31
Office of Science Lab Appraisal Process: https://www.energy.gov/science/office-science-lab-appraisal-proces:
12
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
1. Mission Accomplishment (Delivery of S&T)
2. Design, Construction and Operation of Research Facilities
3. Science and Technology Project/Program Management
4. Leadership and Stewardship of the Laboratory
5. Integrated Environment, Safety and Health Protection
6. Business Systems
7. Facilities Maintenance and Infrastructure
8. Security and Emergency Management
Each Performance Goal is comprised of a small number of Objectives. Within each Objective,
Science Programs and Site Offices can further identify a small number of "Notable Outcomes"
that illustrate or amplify important features of the laboratory's performance for the coming year.
The Performance Goals, Objectives, and Notable Outcomes are documented at the beginning of
each year in a Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plan (PEMP) that is appended to the
respective Laboratory contract. Information regarding an individual PEMP may be obtained by
contacting the appropriate SC Site Office.
Each year, SC conducts an evaluation of the scientific, technological, managerial, and
operational performance of the contractors who manage and operate its ten national laboratories.
It was designed to improve the transparency of the process, raise the level of involvement by the
SC leadership, increase consistency in the way the laboratories are evaluated, and more
effectively incentivize contractor performance by tying performance to fee earned, contract
length, and the public release of grades.
SC follows a Science and Energy Lab approach to evaluate its M&O contractors that uses broad,
office-wide performance criteria that are mostly subjective. These evaluations provide the basis
for determining annual performance fees and the possibility of winning additional years on the
contract through an "Award Term" extension. They also serve to inform the decisions that DOE
makes regarding whether to extend or to compete the management and operating contracts when
they expire.
The current laboratory appraisal process used by the SC has been in place since Fiscal Year
2006. It was designed to improve the transparency of the process, raise the level of involvement
of SC leadership, increase consistency as to how laboratories are evaluated, and more effectively
incentivize contractor performance by tying performance to fee earned, contract length, and the
public release of performance grades.
32
At the conclusion of each Fiscal Year, the S&T (Goals 1-3) performance of the Laboratory is
evaluated by the organizations that fund work at the Laboratory. In addition to the SC science
programs, SC solicits input from all organizations that spend more than $1 million at the
Laboratory. This S&T input is weighted according to the dollars spent at the Laboratory. Each
Site Office evaluates the Laboratory's performance against the M&O Objectives (Goals 5-8).
Site Offices and Science Programs provide input regarding the contractor's performance with
32 Office of Science Appraisal Process and Scoring System: https://science.osti.gov/lp/Laboratory-Appraisal-Proces:
13
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
respect to Goal 4 to the SC leadership who subsequently determine the Laboratory's score in this
area. In determining these grades, the SC Science Programs and Site Offices consider the
laboratory's performance against the Notable Outcomes, defined in the PEMP, as well as other
sources of performance information that becomes available to DOE throughout the year. These
include independent scientific program and project reviews, external operational reviews
conducted by the Government Accountability Office (GAO), DOE Inspector General (IG), and
other parts of DOE, and the results of SC's own oversight activities. The evaluation process
includes end-of-year normalization meetings for all the Goals, during which rating organizations
report their proposed scores/grades and work to ensure a consistent and fair scoring/grading
approach across all ten Laboratories.
The SC appraisal process uses a five-point (0-4.3) scoring system with corresponding grades for
the Performance Goals and Objectives. A grade of "B+" is awarded for performance at the
Objective level that meets SC's expectations for performance. SC intentionally set its
expectations associated with a B+ very high, and does not equate performance below a B+ as
necessarily unsatisfactory, but as offering opportunity for improvement. The grade for each of
the Performance Goals is based on a weighted computation of the scores of the individual
Performance Objectives identified for each Goal, and SC uses the resultant Performance Goal
grades to create annual "Report Cards" for each Laboratory that are publicly available on the SC
website. The scale SC uses for assigning scores and letter grades is provided in the table below.
Table 2: SC Score/Letter Grade Scale
Score/Letter Grade Scale
Final
A+
A
A-
B+*
B
B-
C+
C
C-
D
F
Grade:
4.3 -
4.0 -
3.7
3.4 -
3.0
2.7
2.4
2.0
1.7
1.0
0.7 -
Score:
4.1
3.8
3.5
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.1
1.8
1.1
0.8
0
*SC defines a grade of "B+" as "Meets Expectations.'
7.3
Other SC Programs33
SC also sponsors other programs, including basic research at over 300 institutions across the
country, including universities, national laboratories, nonprofits, and private sector institutions.
Funding is awarded on a competitive basis using peer review. Research efforts range from
single-investigator grants to large team-based projects.
SC administers research through six major program offices, spanning a broad range of
disciplines:
33
Science Programs: ps://www.energy.gov/science/mission/science-programi
14
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Advanced Scientific Computing Research,
Basic Energy Sciences,
Biological and Environmental Research,
Fusion Energy Sciences,
High Energy Physics, and,
Nuclear Physics.
8.
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE)
The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) conducts program evaluations
to assess whether programs are meeting planned goals and achieving commercialization and
market results. Evaluations identify opportunities for efficient and effective management of
public investments. Evaluations also identify opportunities to improve programs to more
effectively and efficiently manage public investments.
Technology development programs in DOE extensively and successfully utilize peer review to
evaluate research and development (R&D) activities at the project and program levels. In
addition to peer review, R&D Program Managers are encouraged to use other evaluation
methods to obtain information on program effectiveness and realized benefits that cannot be
provided using the peer review method.34
The potential benefits of periodically doing systematic studies using other R&D
evaluation methods are considerable. Programs could:
Generate additional important information for use in continuous program improvement
Document knowledge benefits that are often unaccounted for when communicating
programs' value to stakeholders
Document realized market benefits associated with past research successes
Better answer questions about cost-effectiveness of the longer-term research
EERE programs use a variety of evaluation methods to quantify impacts, assess progress, and
promote improvement. 35 These methods include:
Outcome Evaluations
Impact Evaluations
In-Progress Peer Reviews
As noted in the Strategic Evaluation Planning section, the type of evaluations performed depend
on the evidence needed and questions that need to be answered. This includes a consideration of
34Overview of Evaluation Methods for R&D Programs:
 ttps://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2015/05/f22/evaluation methods r and d.pdf
35
EERE Types of Evaluations: https://www.energy.gov/eere/analysis/types-evaluations
15
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
questions that if answered are expected to help provide the organization or program with
evidence it can use to improve how it does business.
Performance measures are derived from various sources including the Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy's (EERE) Strategic Plans, Annual Operating Plans, etc.,
aligned with the elements of the SOW, and that directly support EERE's strategic goals and
commitments.
Performance measures consist of critical outcomes, performance objectives, and performance
indicators. Critical Outcomes - The M&O Contractor for the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL) is assessed against all elements of the SOW. 36 EERE provides a proposed
grade and a score from the corresponding numerical range for each Goal (see Table 3 below) for
Letter Grade Scale). Each evaluation will measure the degree of effectiveness and performance
of the Contractor in meeting the corresponding Objectives.37
Table 3: EERE Scoring/Letter Grade Scale
Score/Letter Grade Scale
Final
A-
B+*
B
B-
C+
C
C-
D
F
Grade:
4.3
4.0
3.7
3.4 -
3.0
2.7
2.4
2.0
1.7
1.0
0.7 -
Score:
4.1
3.8
3.5
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.1
1.8
1.1
0.8
0
To further support evidence building and informed decision-making, NREL developed OpenEl,
which is a free and open knowledge sharing platform created to facilitate access to energy-
related data, models, tools, and information to make energy-related data and information
searchable, accessible, useful to both people and machines. All users can search, edit, contribute,
and access data in OpenEl, which contains a wide variety of topics ranging from renewable
energy, to policy and regulations, to analyzed data and raw data.
In addition, EERE's Strategic Analysis Team (SA) performs cross-cutting, gap-filling, and
corporate analysis associated with the research, development, demonstration, and deployment of
EERE technologies. SA develops tools and methods to enable consistent evaluation and analysis
across EERE, and serves a leadership role in related analysis across DOE, other government
36 DE-AC36-08G028308 Modification M1130:
https://www.nrel.gov/extranet/primecontract/assets/pdfs/m1130 section b.pdi
37 Annual Performance Evaluation of the Alliance for Sustainable Energy at the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, FY 15, Part 2: https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/06/f32/GO-16-025%20Egger Part2.pdi
16
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
agencies, and external stakeholders. EERE evaluation publications can be found here:
 https://www.energy.gov/eere/analysis/eere-evaluation-publications
9.
Office of Electricity (OE)
The Office of Electricity (OE) provides leadership to ensure that the Nation's energy delivery
system is secure, resilient, and reliable. The office includes three divisions:
Table 4: OE Divisions and Priorities
Division
Priorities
Advanced Grid Research and
Smart Grid Research and Development supports activities
Development
to adapt and integrate the use of advanced digital
technology to modernize the nation's electric delivery
network for enhanced operational intelligence and
connectivity. The enhanced connectivity will allow
different applications, systems, and devices to be
interoperable with one another, through a combined use of
open system architecture, as an integration platform, and
commonly-shared technical standards and protocols for
communications and information systems.
Microgrid Research and Development supports activities
to improve microgrid functionality and operations,
including development and improvement of key microgrid
components. Microgrids are localized grids that can
disconnect from the traditional grid to operate
autonomously and help mitigate grid disturbances to
strengthen grid resilience.
Energy Storage supports research in basic materials
forming battery, electrolytic capacitor, and flywheel
systems which need to be improved to improve energy
storage and cycling capabilities and reduce costs. It also
supports activities in advanced component development
and field testing of storage systems in diverse applications
to bring these technologies closer to market. This research
will help lower life-cycle costs, improve performance, and
reduce siting issues due to reduced size and environmental
impact.
Support the Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorities among
Electricity Delivery
other related energy authorities, transmission, Presidential
permits, and technical assistance.
Strengthen electricity infrastructure against cyber-related
Electricity Delivery Cybersecurity
threats and mitigate vulnerabilities aligned with OE's R&D
Research and Development
programs
17
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Through its Research, Development, and Deployment work, OE is pursuing technologies to
improve grid reliability, efficiency, flexibility, functionality, and security; and making
investments and sponsoring demonstrations aimed at bringing new and innovative technologies
to maturity and helping them transition to market. Most of OE's efforts today are being
conducted through the Grid Modernization Initiative. OE is also laying the framework for a
modern electricity system by contributing to the development and implementation of electricity
policy at the Federal and State level.
Prior program valuations/peer reviews of OE programs include:
TRANSFORMER RESILIENCE AND ADVANCED COMPONENTS
2019 Transformer Resilience and Advanced Components Program Review, Knoxville,
TN, August 13-14, 2019
TRANSMISSION RELIABILITY
2018 Reliability & Markets Program Peer Review, June 5, 2018
2018 Transmission Reliability Program Peer Review, June 6, 2018
2017 Transmission Reliability Program Peer Review, Washington, DC, June 13, 2017
2017 Reliability & Markets Agenda and Presentations, Washington, DC, June 14, 2017
2016 Reliability & Markets Agenda and Presentations, Arlington, VA, June 9-10, 2016
2016 Transmission Reliability Program Peer Review, Washington, DC, June 7-8, 2016
2015 Reliability & Markets Agenda and Presentations, Ithaca, NY, August 4-5, 2015
2015 Transmission Reliability Program Peer Review, Washington, DC, June 10-11, 2015
NOTE: Evaluations conducted prior to 2015 can be found here:
https://www.energy.gov/oe/reviews-archived
10.
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER)
The Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER) addresses the
emerging threats of tomorrow while protecting the reliable flow of energy to Americans today by
improving energy infrastructure security and supporting the Department of Energy's (DOE)
national security mission. CESER's focus is preparedness and response activities to natural and
man-made threats, ensuring a stronger, more prosperous, and secure future for the Nation.
CESER's cybersecurity priorities are:
Priority 1: Increase Cyber Visibility of Critical Energy Systems and Networks - We are
continuing to advance technologies and systems that increase the visibility of cyber
threats targeting energy companies' industrial controls systems across the nation. With
enhanced cyber visibility, detection, monitoring capabilities, we can respond and curtail
confront malicious cyberattacks before they compromise critical systems.
Priority 2: Build Security Into Future, Clean Energy Grid - As we transition to a 100%
18
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
clean energy economy, it is critical to build effective cybersecurity measures into the
evolving grid to ensure a reliable flow of energy across the nation. CESER and its
stakeholders are ensuring renewable technologies - -from wind to solar - will be able
to
deliver a high volume of energy while addressing grid vulnerabilities.
Priority 3: Manage Supply Chain Risks in Digital Components of Nation' 's Critical
Energy Infrastructure - Digital components in our national critical infrastructure are
increasingly becoming the strategic target for adversary nations. We 're partnering
across the energy sector to identify high priority digital components prevalent in the
nation 's critical energy systems, perform expert testing, and share information about
vulnerabilities in the digital supply chain.
Priority 4: Strengthen the Current and Future Energy Cyber Workforce - A highly
skilled cybersecurity workforce across the energy sector is critical to protecting the
nation 's energy systems. CESER is developing exercises, trainings, and resources that
improve preparedness and coordination across governments and industry, while
promoting a robust cybersecurity education for the next generation of cyber
professionals. We are also utilizing Cyber-Informed Engineering - a methodology to
ensure that cybersecurity is a core component in technologies from ideation to
deployment.
Priority 5: Establish Policies, Procedures, and Capabilities to Enable Cyber
Preparedness and Incident Response - Through risk-based energy security planning and
strategic partnerships across a broad range of stakeholders, CESER is establishing
policies, procedures, and capabilities needed to improve energy sector cyber resilience,
address new threats, conduct more efficient and effective response, and mitigate
disruptions to energy infrastructure in case of a cyberattack.
These priorities - as well as DOE's Multiyear Plan for Energy Sector Cybersecurity - drive the
following CESER initiatives:
CESER Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Activities - CESER accelerated efforts to
address high-altitude electromagnetic pulse (HEMP) and geomagnetic disturbance
(GMD) risks to the Nation's energy system.
Cybersecurity for Energy Delivery Systems Research and Development - CESER is
investing in the ideas of partners in the Energy Sector, the cybersecurity community,
academia, state and local governments, and the National Laboratories to reduce the risk
of energy disruptions due to cyber events.
Cybersecurity Testing for Resilient Industrial Control Systems - CESER works
closely with energy sector owners and operators to better detect risks and mitigate them.
Cybersecurity for the Operational Technology Environment (CyOTE) - Through
CyOTETM, CESER looks to further its vision of secure and reliable energy delivery
systems nationwide.
Department of Energy CyberForce Program - The U.S. Department of Energy's
CyberForce Competition TM challenges the next generation of cyber professionals
to actively secure critical control.
Clean Energy Cybersecurity Accelerator Program - As DOE works towards a zero-
19
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
emissions future, CESER is also tackling the growing cyber threats to the U.S. energy
sector.
11.
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM)
The Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM) manages the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve Office (SPRO) M&O Contract. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR), the world's
largest supply of emergency crude oil), consisting of salt caverns storing crude oil in Texas and
Louisiana. This was established primarily to reduce the impact of disruptions in supplies of
petroleum products and to carry out obligations of the United States under the international
energy program. FECM manages this support using an M&O Contract.
FECM follows a Site Specific approach to evaluate its M&O contractors that uses detailed
performance criteria. Under this approach, most performance criteria are objective criteria, and a
few are broader, subjective criteria. FECM's objective performance criteria are defined based on
quantifiable metrics and performance targets38 performance goals are established in the
overarching M&O contract for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. 39
The Available Award Fee
shall be established considering the level of complexity, difficulty, cost effectiveness, and risk
associated with specific objectives/incentives defined in the Performance Evaluation and
Measurement Plan (PEMP). 40 The Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plan(s) sets out
the criteria upon which the Contractor will be evaluated relating to any technical, schedule,
management, and/or cost objectives selected for evaluation. These criteria are generally
objective, but may also include subjective criteria. 41
12.
Office of Nuclear Energy (NE)
The Office of Nuclear Energy's (NE) primary mission is to advance nuclear power as a resource
capable of making major contributions in meeting U.S. energy supply, environmental, and
energy security needs.
NE manages the Idaho National Laboratory (INL) M&O Contract.42 INL is the nation's leading
center for nuclear energy research and development. INL works in each of the strategic goal
areas of DOE: energy, national security, science, and environment. NE follows a Science and
38 GAO-19-5 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY - Performance Evaluations Could Better Assess Management and
Operating Contractor Costs, page 84. https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697103.pd
39 Contract DE-FE 0011020, M&O Contract for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve:
tps://www.spr.doe.gov/reports/FFPOContract/Contract%20N0.%20DE-FE0011020.pdf
40
Contract DE-FE0011020, Modification 0021, Page 3, Paragraph B.2.(b) Total Available Award
Fee:
  https://www.spr.doe.gov/reports/FFPOContract/21/Attachment%20t0%20Mod%200021.pdf
41 Contract DE-FE0011020, Modification 0049, Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plan(s), Section I, Page
I-19, paragraph I.109, (d):
tps://www.spr.doe.gov/reports/FFPOContract/49/Attachment%20t0%20Mod%200049.pdf
42
Idaho National Laboratory Management and Operation Contract:
https://www.id.energy.gov/doeid/INLContract/INL-Contract.htm
20
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Energy Lab approach to evaluate its M&O contractor that uses broad, office-wide performance
criteria that are mostly subjective. 43
This performance evaluation provides a standard by which to determine whether the M&O contractor
is acting in a managerially and operationally responsible manner and is meeting the mission
requirement and performance expectations/objectives of the Department as stipulated within their
contract.
In partnership with the Contractor, the DOE Office of Nuclear Energy (NE) and DOE-Idaho
Operations Office (DOE-ID) define the measurement basis that serves as the Contractor's
performance-based evaluation. The Performance Goals, Performance Objectives and set of Notable
Outcomes are developed in accordance with expectations set forth within the contract. The Notable
Outcomes for meeting the Objectives set forth within this plan have been developed in coordination
with NE program offices as appropriate.
This performance-based approach focuses the evaluation of performance against Performance
Goals. Progress against these Goals is measured using a set of Objectives. The success of each
Objective will be measured based on demonstrated performance by the INL, and on a set of
Notable Outcomes that focus Laboratory leadership on the specific items that are the most
important initiatives and highest risk issues the Laboratory must address during the year. These
Notable Outcomes should be objective, measurable, and results-oriented to allow for a definitive
determination of whether the specific Outcome was achieved at the end of the year. 44
The DOE policy for implementing performance-based management, as implemented at INL, are
detailed in annual Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plans45. and include the following
guiding principles:
Performance Objectives are established in partnership with affected organizations and are
directly aligned to the DOE strategic goals;
Resource decisions and budget requests are tied to results; and
Results are used for management information, establishing accountability, and driving
long-term improvements.
43
GAO 19-5, Appendix VII: Additional Information on the Office of Nuclear Energy's Performance Evaluations,
page 99: https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697103.pdf
442019 INL Performance and Measurement Plan, Contract No. DE-AC07-05ID14517:
ttps://www.id.energy.gov/doeid/INLContract/SEC%20J/Mod425SectionJAttachmentK.pdf
45
2019 INL Performance and Measurement Plan, Contract No. DE-AC07-05ID14517:
https://www.id.energy.gov/doeid/INLContract/SEC%20J/Mod425SectionJAttachmentK.pdi
21
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
For FY 19 the following performance goals were established for the INL contract46:
Table 5: FY 19 Performance Goals for INL
Performance Goal
Weight
GOAL 1.0 Efficient and Effective Mission Accomplishment
70%
GOAL 2.0 Efficient and Effective Stewardship and Operation of Research
15%
Facilities
GOAL 3.0 Sound and Competent Leadership and Stewardship of the Laboratory
15%
GOAL 4.0 Sustain Excellence and Enhance Effectiveness of Integrated Safety,
30%
Health and Environmental Protection
GOAL 5.0 Deliver Efficient, Effective, and Responsive Business Systems and
25%
Resources
that Enable the Successful Achievement of the Laboratory Mission(s)
GOAL 6.0 Sustain Excellence in Operating, Maintaining, and Renewing the
20%
Facility and Infrastructure Portfolio to Meet Laboratory Needs
GOAL 7.0 Sustain and Enhance the Effectiveness of Integrated Safeguards and
25%
Security Management (ISSM) and Emergency Management Systems
Table 6: Award Fee Pool linked to Adjectival Ratings
Award-Fee Pool Available To Be Earned
Adjectival Rating
91%-100%
Excellent
76%-90%
Very Good
51-75%
Good
No Greater Than 50%
Satisfactory
0%
Unsatisfactory
In a manner similar to the Laboratories managed by the Office of Science, NE provides a
proposed grade and a score from the corresponding numerical range for each Objective (see
Figure below) for Letter Grade Scale). Each evaluation will measure the degree of effectiveness
and performance of the Contractor in meeting the corresponding Objectives.
Table 7: NE Scoring/Letter Grades
Score/Letter Grade Scale
Final
A-
B+*
B
B-
C+
C
C-
D
F
Grade:
4.3
4.0
3.7
3.4
3.0
2.7
2.4
2.0
1.7
1.0
0.7 -
Score:
4.1
3.8
3.5
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.1
1.8
1.1
0.8
0
46
For the most part, these performance criteria have remained unchanged from fiscal year 2007, GAO-19-5
Management and Operating Contracts, p. 99: https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697103.pdi
22
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
13.
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E)
In 2005, leaders from both parties in Congress asked the National Academies to "identify the
most urgent challenges the U.S. faces in maintaining leadership in key areas of science and
technology," as well as specific steps policymakers could take to help the U.S. compete, prosper,
and stay secure in the 21st Century. In its report for Congress, Rising Above the Gathering
Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future, the National
Academies called for decisive action, warning policymakers that U.S. advantages in science and
technology - which made the country a world leader for decade - had already begun to erode.
The report recommended that Congress establish an Advanced Research Projects Agency within
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) modeled after the successful Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) - the agency credited with such innovations as GPS, the stealth
fighter, and computer networking.
Authorized via Public Law 110-69, America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote
Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science Act, ARPA-E's goals include:
Enhancing the economic and energy security of the United States through the
development of energy technologies that result in:
Reductions of imports of energy from foreign sources;
Reductions of energy-related emissions, including greenhouse gases; and
Improvements in the energy efficiency of all economic sectors; and
Ensuring that the United States maintains a technological lead in developing and
deploying advanced energy technologies.
ARPA-E funds a wide range of individual technology projects (1,149). Typically, these projects
are organized into focused technology programs (69) that revolve around a common technical
area. All ARPA-E programs and projects are created through a process of rigorous debate over
the technical and scientific merits and challenges of potential research areas. ARPA-E Program
Directors are constantly exploring potential topics for future program areas.
ARPA-E also issues periodic open funding solicitations47 for a broader range of projects that do
not fall into a single technical area to address the full range of energy-related technologies, as
well as targeted funding solicitations aimed at supporting America's small business innovators.
ARPA-E also funds projects on a rolling basis through "special projects" funding opportunities
that are meant to inform potential new program areas for the future.
ARPA-E Exploratory Topics are developed through the FOAs, and include:
Exploratory Topic A: Extremely Durable Concretes and Cementitious Materials -
47
OPEN Programs arpa-e.energy.gov
23
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Extremely durable concretes and cementitious materials to tackle technology challenges
in the development of widely applicable concrete and cement.
Exploratory Topic B: Downhole Tools to Enable Enhanced Geothermal Systems -
Novel, low-cost sensor technologies that can help mitigate risks and lower costs for deep,
extremely hot enhanced geothermal systems (EGS) by better characterizing rock
formations and fluid enthalpy at depth.
Exploratory Topic C: Leveraging Innovations Supporting Nuclear Energy -
Advancements in nuclear facility sensors, tools, analytics, and controls.
Exploratory Topic D: Diagnostic Resource Teams to Support the Validation of
Potentially Transformative Fusion-Energy Concepts - State-of-the-art diagnostic
measurements to be made on potentially transformative, ARPA-E-supported fusion-
energy concepts to validate their performance, uncover problems, and guide research
priorities.
Exploratory Topic F: High Value Methane Pyrolysis - High value methane pyrolysis,
including approaches that can economically convert natural gas to both fuel cell-grade
hydrogen and higher value carbon materials (e.g., carbon fiber) with a low CO2 footprint.
Exploratory Topics G & T: Supporting Entrepreneurial Energy Discoveries - An
ongoing funding opportunity for a range of the most innovative and unconventional ideas
across the energy technology spectrum, exploring high-risk R&D that could lead to the
development of disruptive technologies
Exploratory Topic H: Establishing Validation Sites for Field-Level Emissions
Quantification of Agricultural Bioenergy Feedstock Production - "Ground truth"
solutions to establish measurements and protocols for emissions monitoring at the field
level to create publicly available, open-source, high-resolution datasets to support testing
and validation of emerging biofuel production monitoring technologies.
Exploratory Topic I: Electricity System Models for Carbon Capture Resources -
Electricity system models and associated analysis that can inform technology
development for new grid resources.
Exploratory Topic J: Biotechnologies to Ensure a Robust Supply of Critical
Materials for Clean Energy - Novel approaches in microbiology, synthetic biology, and
process engineering in support of addressing mining industry challenges to ensure a
robust mineral supply chain for clean energy applications.
Exploratory Topic K: Recycle Underutilized Solids to Energy - Processes to convert
plastics, rubber, composites, and paper to create a high-energy content liquid that can be
easily shipped to and stored at points of aggregation.
Exploratory Topic L: Insulating Nanofluids and Solids to Upgrade our Large Aging
Transformer Equipment - Vital insulating elements in large power transformers (LPTs)
to increase their durability, reliability, and resilience.
Exploratory Topic M: Mining Incinerated Disposal Ash Streams - Recovery and
reclamation of critical materials (CMs) and other valuable elements from Municipal Solid
Waste Incineration (MSWI) ashes.
Exploratory Topic N: Waste into X - Improvement of the physical or chemical
properties of Municipal Solid Waste Incineration (MWSI) ash into valuable products.
Exploratory Topic O: Direct Removal of Carbon Dioxide from Oceanwater - Direct
24
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
removal of carbon dioxide from oceanwater and other natural waters by addressing
challenges and opportunities specifically found in operation in an oceanic environment.
Exploratory Topic P: Direct Removal of Carbon Dioxide from Ambient Air -
Robust, energy efficient, and low-cost strategies for direct removal of carbon dioxide
from ambient air.
Exploratory Topic Q: Connecting Aviation By Lighter Electric Systems - Medium-
voltage (>10kV) power distribution cables, connectors, and circuit breakers for fully
electric aviation applications.
Exploratory Topic R: Lowering CO2: Models to Optimize Train Infrastructure,
Vehicles, and Energy Storage - Planning tools for identification, evaluation, and
prioritization of energy storage-related technology developments whose deployment
would significantly reduce GHG emissions from the rail freight sector.
Exploratory Topic S: Topology Optimization and Additive Manufacturing for
Performance Enhancement of High Temperature and High Pressure Heat
Exchangers - Design and manufacture of high-temperature, high-pressure, and compact
heat exchangers.
Exploratory Topic U: Sulfur Hexafluoride (SF6)-Free Routes for Electrical
Equipment - Technologies aimed at reducing sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) emissions from
the electric transmission and distribution sector.
The Seeding Critical Advances for Leading Energy technologies with Untapped Potential
(SCALEUP) program builds on ARPA-E's primary research and development focus to support
the scaling of high-risk and potentially disruptive new technologies across the full spectrum of
energy applications. The goal of the program is to support ARPA-E-funded technologies, past
and present, transition from proof-of-concept prototypes to commercially scalable and
deployable versions of the technology and be well-positioned for investment from the private
sector.
The ARPA-E Technology-to-Market program provides practical training and business
information to equip awardees with a clear understanding of market needs to guide technical
development. Technology-to-Market milestones include:
Secure IP on inventions
Learning about markets & applications
Product definition, refinement, and validation
Cost-performance model
Competitive analysis
Identify & engage with potential customers / partners
Knowledge of regulatory issues
Knowledge of production processes
Identify scalability risks
Identify / engage suppliers
Map out next stage goals and resource needs
Identify appropriate next stage funding sources
25
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Engage with next stage funding sources
Identify / engage resources for tech to market work
In addition, ARPA-E hosts the annual Energy Innovation Summit, which brings together leaders
from academia, government, and business to discuss the foremost energy issues, showcases the
latest technology innovations, and cultivates relationships to help advance cutting-edge
technologies toward deployment. In 2019, the Summit hosted nearly 1,700 registered for the
Summit, from 47 states and 16 countries, and featured nearly 300 transformational energy
technologies and innovations. ARPA-E will host its twelfth Energy Innovation Summit in March
2022.
ARPA-E provides an annual report to Congress48 summarizing ARPA-E's activities. The latest,
available report is for FY2019.
14.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)
The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) collects, analyzes, and disseminates
independent and impartial energy information to promote sound policymaking, efficient markets,
and public understanding of energy and its interaction with the economy and the environment.
EIA provides a wide range of information and data products covering energy production, stocks,
demand, imports, exports, and prices and prepares analyses and special reports on topics of
current interest:
Table 8: EIA Reports and Analysis
Topic
Report/Analysis
Petroleum & Other Liquids
This Week in Petroleum
Weekly Petroleum Status Report
Natural Gas
Weekly Natural Gas Storage Report
Natural Gas Weekly Update
Electricity
Electric Power Monthly
Electricity Data Browser
Consumption & Efficiency
Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS)
Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS)
Coal
Quarterly Coal Report
Coal Data Browser
Renewable & Alternative
Alternative Fuel Vehicle Browser
Fuels
Nuclear & Uranium
Daily Status of Nuclear Outages
48
Annual Reports
arpa-e.energy.gov
26
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Topic
Report/Analysis
Total Energy
Monthly Energy Review
Annual Energy Review
Analysis & Projects
Short-Term Energy Outlook
Annual Energy Outlook
International Energy Outlook
Markets & Finance
Market Prices and Uncertainty Report
Energy & Financial Markets: What Drives Crude Oil Prices?
Environment
U.S. Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions
Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions at the State Level,
through 2018
Energy Disruptions
Energy Disruptions
U.S. States
State Energy Data System (SEDS)
Maps
U.S. Energy Atlas
U.S. Energy Mapping System
Gulf of Mexico
International
International Energy Statistics
Regional Dashboards &
New England Dashboard
Data
Southern California Daily Energy Report
Energy Disruptions
The Office of Energy Analysis analyzes energy supply, demand, and prices including the impact
of financial markets on energy markets; prepares reports on current and future energy use;
analyzes the impact of energy policies; and develops advanced techniques for conducting energy
information analyses. This office also oversees the planning and execution of EIA's analysis and
forecasting programs to ensure that EIA models, analyses, and projections meet the highest
standards of relevance, reliability, and timeliness.
In
addition, EIA is committed to enhancing the value of its free and open data by making it
available through an Application Programming Interface (API) and open data tools to better
serve our customers. The data in the API is also available in bulk file, in Excel via the add-in, in
Google Sheets via an add-on, and via widgets that embed interactive data visualizations of EIA
data on any website. By making EIA data available in machine-readable formats, the creativity in
the private, the non-profit, and the public sectors can be harnessed to find new ways to innovate
and create value-added services powered by public data.
Currently, EIA's API contains the following main data sets:
27
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Hourly electricity operating data, including actual and forecast demand, net generation,
and the power flowing between electric systems
408,000 electricity series organized into 29,000 categories
30,000 State Energy Data System series organized into 600 categories
115,052 petroleum series and associated categories
34,790 U.S. crude imports series and associated categories
11,989 natural gas series and associated categories
132,331 coal series and associated categories
3,872 Short-Term Energy Outlook series and associated categories
368,466 Annual Energy Outlook series and associated categories
92,836 International energy series
The EIA API is offered as a free public service, although registration is required.
The EIA Administrator, as head of a principal statistical agency and DOE's Statistical Official, is
DOE/EIA's principal representative on Interagency Council on Statistical Policy (ICSP), which
is dedicated to dedicated to improving the quality of Federal statistics.
15.
Loan Programs Office (LPO)
The 49Loan Programs Office (LPO) finances large-scale, all-of-the-above energy infrastructure
projects in the United States. LPO administers three distinct loan programs, but each offers a
similar value to borrowers:
1. Provide first-of-a-kind projects and other high-impact energy-related ventures with
access to debt capital that private lenders cannot or will not provide.
2. Provide flexible, custom financing that helps to meet the specific needs of individual
borrowers.
3. Encourages early engagement and is a valuable partner to applicants throughout the entire
lifetime of a project.
Once LPO closes a loan or loan guarantee, projects are monitored and evaluated throughout
project development, construction, commissioning, and operation until the loan has been repaid
in full. LPO's team of financial, technical, environmental, and legal professionals is dedicated to
advancing an all-of-the-above energy strategy that avoids, reduces, or sequesters greenhouse
gases.
After financial close or first funding, responsibility for managing a project transfers from the
LPO Origination Division to the Portfolio Management Division (PMD). PMD provides ongoing
monitoring and oversight to ensure that the construction and completion phase of a project is
executed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the loan documents. PMD is also
49
DOE-LPO-Brochure-2020-AA (energy.gov)
28
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
responsible for maintaining compliance with the loan documents terms and conditions after
project completion. Some of PMD's responsibilities include, but are not limited to, monitoring
borrower activities to ensure compliance with the loan documents; monitoring and analyzing
project costs, schedule, and performance quality; and review borrowers requests for
amendments, consents, or waivers to the loan documents.
Technical monitoring activities performed by LPO's Technical and Project Management
Division (TPMD) during construction and after project completion are focused on monitoring
that the project is completed on budget, on schedule, and at a performance level that produces
revenue sufficient to repay the loan.
An assigned project engineer provides technical monitoring support for specific projects. The
federal project engineer retains the services of an independent engineer to perform detailed
project monitoring activities, including validation of project status, evaluation of project risk,
review and certification of milestone completion, evaluation of payment requests, and evaluation
of change requests. The federal project engineer serves in a technical oversight capacity,
directing and reviewing the activities of the independent engineer, summarizing, and interpreting
borrower and independent engineer technical input for submission to PMD, and recommending
responses to borrower requests.
LPO publishes an Annual Portfolio Status Report for each FY. The latest can be found here:
LPO21-002-APSR-2020-v11 (energy.gov).
16.
Office of Environmental Management (EM)
The DOE uses corporate performance measures to assess whether it is meeting its cleanup
mission. The Office of Environmental Management (EM) assigns specific measures to each site
that are tailored to the unique nature and scope of each area's contamination and cleanup work.
Progress against these measures at a specific site is a confirmable indication of progress towards
EM's cleanup goals and priorities Completion of all of the corporate performance measures
result in completion of that site. 50
EM, Congress, and the public routinely monitor and evaluate cleanup progress using corporate
performance measures throughout the year. These quantitative indicators focus on the
effectiveness of risk-reducing actions that lead to completion of site cleanup. Each cleanup
process must be consistent with each site's individual baseline and milestones. The corporate
measures (i.e., those relating to the entire DOE-EM complex) are tracked in the context of the
total measure (life-cycle) necessary to complete cleanup of each site, as well as the EM program
as a whole. EM annual performance results can be found in the Department of Energy Annual
Performance Reports.
50 Office of Environmental Management, Budget and performance: https://www.energy.gov/em/services/program
management/budget-
formance#:~:text=The%20Office%20of%20Environmental%20Management%2C%20Congress%20and%20the,a
ctions%20that%20lead%20t0%20completion%20of%20site%20cleanup.
29
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
EM manages cleanup contracts at the following sites: 51
Brookhaven National Laboratory (https://www.bnl.gov/world/)
Energy Technology Engineering Center (https://www.etec.energy.gov/
Hanford Office of River Protection (https://hanford.gov/page.cfm/orp)
Hanford Richland Operations Office (https://www.hanford.gov/page.cfm/RL)
Idaho Operations Office (https://www.energy.gov/ne/nuclear-facility-operations/idaho-
operations-office)
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (https://www.llnl.gov/llnlsearch/site/cleanup)
Los Alamos Field Office https://www.energy.gov/em-la/environmental-management.
los-alamos-field-office)
Moab UMTRA Project (https://www.gjem.energy.gov/)
Nevada National Security Site (https://www.nnss.gov/pages/about.html)
Oak Ridge (https://www.emcbc.doe.gov/seb/orrec/)
Paducah (https://www.energy.gov/pppo/paducah-site)
Portsmouth (https://www.energy.gov/pppo/portsmouth-site0
Sandia National Laboratory (https://www.sandia.gov/)
Savannah River Site (https://www.srs.gov/general/srs-home.html)
Separations Process Research Unit (SPRU) (https://www.spru.energy.gov/)
West Valley Demonstration Project (https://www.wv.doe.gov/)
EM manages cleanup at the following two sites through M&O Contracts:
Savannah River Site (EM Operated in conjunction with NNSA)
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP)
EM also manages a national laboratory through an M&O Contract:
Savannah River National Laboratory
Additionally, EM provides funding (including award fee for defined performance goals) for the
Los Alamos National Laboratory (managed by NNSA).
The Savannah River National Laboratory (SRNL) is the DOE Office of Environmental
Management (EM) national laboratory, and its resources are used to assist in the cleanup of the
Cold War legacy waste for which EM is accountable. SRNL works collaboratively with other
DOE laboratories to deploy technologies critical to environmental remediation and risk
51
Cleanup Sites: https://www.energy.gov/em/mission/cleanup-sites
30
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
reduction; nuclear materials processing and disposition; nuclear detection, characterization, and
assessments; and gas processing, storage, and transfer systems. 52
The Savannah River National Laboratory Policy Office (as known as the EM Laboratory Policy
Office (EM LPO)) 53 sponsors and coordinates the involvement of national laboratories in support
of the EM mission activities, in accordance with the EM National Laboratory Governance
Framework 54 for the Savannah River National Laboratory (SRNL), which includes the charter
for the EM National Laboratory Network (EMNLN). 55 The EM LPO leads oversight and
management of SRNL in partnership with the National Nuclear Security Agency (NNSA) Office
of Policy with support from the EM and NNSA Savannah River Site/Field Offices. 56
The table below provides the evaluation approach for the award fee portion of the cleanup
contracts. This is the same for all contracts and is out of the FAR.
Table 9: EM Award Fee Adjectival Ratings (based on FAR 16.401)
57
Award Fee
Award-Fee Pool
Description
Adjectival Rating
Available To Be
Earned
Excellent
91-100%
Contractor has exceeded almost all the significant award-fee
criteria and has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate as
defined and measured against the criteria in the award-fee plan
for the award-fee evaluation period.
Very Good
76-90%
Contractor has exceeded many of the significant award-fee
criteria and has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate as
defined and measured against the criteria in the award-fee plan
for the award-fee evaluation period.
Good
51-75%
Contractor has exceeded some of the significant award-fee
criteria and has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate as
52 Memorandum, Office of Environmental Management, October 25, 2016, Subject: Savannah River National
Laboratory, "EM's National Laboratory": :https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EM-National
Laboratory-Governance-Framework.pdf
53 EM National Laboratory Network: https://www.energy.gov/em/program-scope/em-national-laboratory-
  network#:~:text=The%20Savannah%20River%20National%20Laboratory%20Policy%20Office%20(as,charter%20f
 or%20the%20EM%20National%20Laboratory%20Network%20(EMNLN).
54
EM National Laboratory Governance Framework: https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EM-
 National-Laboratory-Governance-Framework.pdf
55
EM National Laboratory Network Charter: https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EMNLN-
Charter.pdf
56 EM National Laboratory Governance Framework, page 3:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EM-National-Laboratory-Governance-Framework.pdf
57
Award Fee Adjectival Rating: https://www.acquisition.gov/far/16.401
31
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Award Fee
Award-Fee Pool
Description
Adjectival Rating
Available To Be
Earned
defined and measured against the criteria in the award-fee plan
for the award-fee evaluation period.
Satisfactory
No Greater than
Contractor has met overall cost, schedule, and technical
50%
performance requirements of the contract in the aggregate as
defined and measured against the criteria in the award-fee plan
for the award-fee evaluation period.
Unsatisfactory
0%
Contractor has failed to meet overall cost, schedule, and
technical performance requirements of the contract in the
aggregate as defined and measured against the criteria in the
award-fee plan for the award-fee evaluation period.
17.
Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) strengthens the integrity, economy and efficiency of
the Department's programs and operations by deterring and detecting fraud, waste, abuse, and
mismanagement. OIG audit and inspection reports can be found here:
ttps://www.energy.gov/ig/calendar-year-reports.
18.
Power Marketing Administrations
The federal government, through the Department of Energy, operates four regional Power
Marketing Administrations (PMAs58 including - Bonneville Power Administration (BPA),
Western Area Power Administration (WAPA), Southeastern Power Administration (SEPA), and
Southwestern Power Administration (SWPA) - which operate electric systems and sell the
electrical output of federally owned and operated hydroelectric dams in 34 states. 59
Organizationally, the Power Marketing Administrations are aligned with the Office of Electricity
(OE). 60
The PMAs are unique in that they primarily use power rates to pay annual expenditures, such as
operating and maintenance costs, interest costs, and the cost of power purchased from other
utilities for resale. Each PMA will prepare and publish annually a power repayment study for
each power system. Each power repayment study consists of two parts, historical data, and future
data (forecasts). The development of future data requires the forecast of revenues, expenses and
investment as detailed in DOE Order RA 6120-2. 61 Rates must also be sufficient to repay debt,
including the appropriations that financed completed generation and transmission facilities.
62
58 The Power Marketing Administrations: Background and Current Issues, March 1, 2019, Congressional Research
Service, R45548: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R45548.pdf
59
Power Marketing Administrations: https://www.energy.gov/ea/power-marketing-administrations
60 Office of Electricity: https://www.energy.gov/oe/office-electricity
61
DOE O RA 6120.2, September 20, 1979: https://www.swpa.gov/pdfs/ra6120-2.pd
62
GAO/AIMD-00-114 Power Marketing Administrations, page 10: https://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ai00114.pdf
32
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
The PMAs determine the adequacy of rates by performing annual reviews of their projected costs
and revenues, using processes and assumptions that are to identify and factor into rates, costs that
are legally recoverable, while keeping rates as low as possible. Southwestern, Southeastern, and
most Western projects make this determination through power repayment studies (PRS);
Bonneville uses a revenue requirement study (RRS). These studies analyze historical data and
project estimated future costs and revenues as a key part of rate setting. The primary goal of the
review is to determine whether existing rates will generate sufficient revenue to recover
identified costs over the period under review. 63
18.1
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA)
BPA has created a Strategic Plan 64 centered on what BPA intends to do - with input from the
region - in the near term to deliver on their public responsibilities. This strategic plan is updated
with a Strategic Progress Update.
65
BPA also conducts an Integrated Program Review (IPR) 66 , which plays a significant role
in
BPA's overall financial planning process. It provides the public an opportunity to review and
comment on BPA's spending levels for its capital and expense programs before establishing
them in rate cases. This 2018 Financial Plan includes targets for expense program spending
levels, which are described in the financial health objectives.67
The IPR occurs every 2 years, before each rate case, giving interested parties an opportunity to
review and comment on BPA's proposed spending levels. The IPR integrates both long-term
capital forecasts and near-term program spending levels for the next rate period into one forum.
The final spending levels will serve as a foundation for developing the power and transmission
rates for the next rate period. BPA incorporates program plans in 4 areas:
Power
Transmission
Energy Efficiency
Environment, Fish & Wildlife
63 GAO/AIMD-00-114 Power Marketing Administrations, page 9: https://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ai00114.pdi
64 Bonneville Power Administration Strategic Plan, 2018-2022: https://www.bpa.gov/StrategicPlan/Pages/Strategic-
Plan.aspx
65
Bonneville Power Administration, 2020 Strategic Update: https://www.bpa.gov/StrategicPlan/StrategicPlan/2020-
Strategic-Update.pdf
66 Bonneville Power Administration, Integrated Program Review, Initial Publication, June 2020:
 https://www.bpa.gov/Finance/FinancialPublicProcesses/IPR/2020IPR/20200612-BP-22-IPR-Initial-Detailed-
Publication.pdf
67 Bonneville Power Administration, Financial Plan 2018, page 6:
 https://www.bpa.gov/Finance/FinancialInformation/FinancialPlan/Documents/Financial-Plan-2018.pdf
33
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
BPA incorporates the program plan framework into the IPR. Operating plans and program plans
provide a 2-year comprehensive and integrated view of the business, workforce, and financial
performance of each program.
68
18.2
Southeastern Power Administration (SEPA)
The Southeastern Power Administration (SEPA) constantly evaluates and works to improve
execution of their program. This includes evaluation of the workforce, facilities and operating
systems management that support their functions. This includes awareness of overhead expenses
associated with program execution and management of those expenses and their impact on
power rates. 69 Program reporting is via annual reports, which discusses program status and
financial performance.
18.3
Southwestern Power Administration (SWPA)
The Southwestern Power Administration's (SWPA's) mission is to market and reliably deliver
Federal hydroelectric power with preference to public bodies and cooperatives. As one of four
Power Marketing Administrations in the United States, SWPA markets hydroelectric power in
Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Texas from 24 U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers multipurpose dams with a combined generating capacity of approximately 2,193
MW.70
The SWPA announced its new Strategic Plan in October 2020. 71 This Strategic Plan, focused on
their vision for SWPA both the short and long-term providing a pathway to future workforce
development, operations, partnerships, and evolving services. This plan is coupled with an
annual SWPA Performance Plan - including a Goal Overview. 72 SWPA details performance in
SWPA Annual Reports (with the 2018 Report cited here).
18.4 Western Area Power Administration (WAPA)
The Western Area Power Administration's (WAPA) mission to market and deliver clean,
renewable, reliable, cost-based federal hydroelectric power and related services. 73 WAPA
provides program status and reporting via annual reports. Status is based on objectives laid out
68
Bonneville Power Administration, BP-22 Integrated Program Review, Initial Publication, June 2020, page 1:
 https://www.bpa.gov/Finance/FinancialPublicProcesses/IPR/2020IPR/20200612-BP-22-IPR-Initial-Detailed-
Publication.pdf
69
Southeastern Power Administration, 2019 Annual Report:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/09/f79/2019_SEPA_ANNUAL_REPORT.pdf
70 Southwestern Power Administration, 2018 Annual Report:
  https://swpa.gov/PDFs/ARs/SWPA_FY2018_annual_report.pdf
71
Southwest Power Administration, Strategic Plan, October 2020: https://swpa.gov/StrategicPlan.aspx
72
Southwestern Power Administration Performance Plan - goal Overview: https://swpa.gov/PDFs/swpa-perf-plan-
current.pdf
73 Western Area Power Administration, FY 2020 Annual Report:
https://www.wapa.gov/newsroom/Publications/Documents/FY-2020-annual-report.pdf
34
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
in the WAPA Tactical Action Plan. 74 WAPA has a created a website (called The Source), which
offers a one-stop shop for financial and operational information. With the latest expansion
below, WAPA partnered with customers to determine data elements and information that would
be most helpful to understand cost drivers and expenditures.75 Results are also released
by
quarter, providing performance data based on established goals. An example report is linked
here. 76
19.
Departmental Administration
19.1
Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs (CI)
The Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs (CI) is dedicated to its mission of
providing guidance on legislative and policy issues, informing constituencies on energy matters,
and serving as a liaison between the Department, Congress, State, local, and Tribal governments,
as well as other Federal agencies and stakeholder groups.
19.1.1 Congressional Affairs
Serving as a central point of contact for interactions on congressional matters, the congressional
affairs team offers expertise in coordinating and directing the legislative programs of the
Department, as well as the significant relationships between Departmental officials and Members
of Congress. Providing counsel, advice, and support to the Secretary of Energy and senior
Departmental managers on all congressional initiatives, Congressional Affairs experts also
manage the Senate confirmation process for the Department's Presidential appointments,
coordinate the appearances of Departmental witnesses at Congressional hearings, and ensure the
efficient and timely notification of Departmental activities to congressional stakeholders.
19.1.2 Intergovernmental and External Affairs
The Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs (IGEA) serves as the Departmental
interface for state, tribal and local governments to ensure easy and timely access to relevant
programs, technological assistance, funding opportunities and other DOE resources. The IGEA
team seeks to proactively engage with elected leaders, their staff, related associations, and
relevant stakeholders to ensure that their views are considered as part of the Department's
decision-making process. These experts also provide oversight of the Department's Indian
Policy implementation, and monitor state, local and tribal energy trends and legislative
developments which could impact the Department's activities with stakeholders.
74
WAPA Tactical Action Plan (roadmap 24): https://www.wapa.gov/About/Documents/roadmap-2024-refresh-
tactical-action-plan.pdf
75 WAPA Financial Transparency: :https://www.wapa.gov/About/the-source/Pages/financial-transparency.aspx
76
WAPA Reports 4th Quarter Results: https://www.wapa.gov/newsroom/NewsFeatures/2020/Pages/fourth-quarter-
performance.aspx
35
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
19.2
Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) is responsible for management and financial
integrity of DOE programs, activities, and resources through development, implementation, and
governance of Department and government-wide policies and systems for budget
administration, including development and execution; finance and accounting; internal controls;
financial policy; corporate business systems; strategic planning; performance measurement; and,
interface with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Government Accountability Office
(GAO), DOE Inspector General (IG), and Congress.
Within the OCFO:
Chief Risk Officer (CRO): Provides Departmental support to assess risk and propose
mitigation strategies through integration of risk concepts into strategic planning, and risk
identification and mitigation activities. The CRO works with DOE's Programs, Field
Offices and National Laboratories under the general supervision of the CFO.
Evaluation Officer: Responsible for providing leadership over the agency's evidence-
building activities, including its evaluation activities, learning agenda, and capacity
assessment.
Program Management Improvement Officer (PMIO): Ensures effective
implementation of DOE's program management policies and develop strategies to
enhance the role of program management and managers within the Department. The
PMIO also participates on the Program Management Policy Council (PMPC) and shares
DOE best practices and lessons learned for the benefit of the broader community of
Federal program and project managers and staff.
Performance Improvement Officer (PIO): Collates and assesses data to assist in
recommending improvements for Department-wide programs, issues, and initiatives, and
proposes systems and tools to track progress towards agency and Administration goals.
19.2.1 Finance & Accounting
The Office of Finance and Accounting (CF-10) is responsible for accounting, fiscal integrity, and
financial management services in support the Department's mission. Functions include:
Maintains leadership in financial management by continuously innovating and improving
services provided to the Department.
Prepares the Department's consolidated financial statements, Agency Financial Report,
and other managerial reports.
Conducts accounting operations including specialized financial management areas such
as payroll, loans, environmental liabilities, pension and post-retirement benefits
accounting, and investment activities for the Department.
Leads the Department's internal controls, fraud risk management, and payment integrity
programs.
Delivers timely and reliable financial management reporting and analysis.
36
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
19.2.2 Financial Policy and Audit Resolution
The Office of Financial Policy and Audit Resolution (CF-20) establishes and maintains financial,
accounting, and budgetary policies that support the execution of the Department's
mission. Functions include:
Establishes and maintains Department-wide policies and guidance for finance and
accounting, budget, corporate business systems, and financial management at DOE sites
and facilities.
Leads coordination of Departmental policy changes with internal and external policy
organizations.
Leads DOE's resolution of audit findings and reporting on status of implementing audit
recommendations.
Coordinates audits of DOE's programs between the Department and the Inspector
General (IG) and Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Provides policy guidance and support to Departmental offices on audit resolution,
coordination, and follow-up.
19.2.3 Budget Formulation & Execution
The Office of Budget (CF-30) plans, formulates, analyzes, executes, evaluates, and defends the
Department of Energy's (DOE) Budget. Functions include:
Serves as the Departmental negotiator with the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) on the DOE Budget.
Leads decision management and overall coordination for DOE's Budget to include:
Overall planning and implementation for budget formulation, analysis, execution,
and evaluation;
Supports development and management of the Department's Agency Performance
Report, Strategic Plan, and associated evaluation of progress of goals;
Specialized analysis and prioritization of Departmental resources for the Future-
Years Energy Program (FYEP) and other strategic analysis of budget resources;
External engagement with Congressional Committees on Appropriations for
matters related to the DOE Budget; and
Coordination with Office of Corporate Business Systems (CF-40) on budget-
related financial management IT.
19.2.4 Corporate Business Systems
The Office of Corporate Business Systems (CF-40) is responsible for stewardship of DOE's
financial management, procurement, and human capital systems, as well as other application
solutions necessary to execute the Department's mission. Functions include:
37
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Plans and manages design, integration, implementation, and cyber security of the
Department's corporate business systems.
Operates and maintains corporate financial systems utilizing efficient, cost-effective, and
appropriate technology to allow for delivery and dissemination of relevant information.
Maintains compatibility among corporate business systems to facilitate electronic
exchange of data with internal and external stakeholders. Interfaces with Headquarters
Programs, Field Offices, and Management and Operating Contractors.
Provides qualified Information Technology project management support.
Develops and maintains systems documentation and training materials.
Defines website standards for the CF organizations and manages CF web technical
infrastructure to ensure compliance with laws, regulations, and recommended practices.
Serves as CF liaison with the Chief Information Officer (CIO) for corporate DOE
business system and CF Information Technology services.
Oversees completion of internal and external CF Information Technology reporting.
Serves as CF lead on internal and external Information Technology committees and
working groups.
19.3
Office of Economic Impact and Diversity (ED)
The Office of Economic Impact and Diversity (ED) develops and executes Department-wide
policies to implement applicable legislation and Executive Orders that strengthen diversity and
inclusion goals affecting equal employment opportunities, small and disadvantaged
businesses, minority educational institutions, and historically under-represented communities.
Key ED initiatives include:
Equity in Energy - designed to expand the inclusion and participation of individuals in
underserved communities, such as minorities, women, veterans, and formerly
incarcerated persons, in all the programs of the Department of Energy and in the private
energy sector. The Department's 200-Day Equity Assessment completed in 2021
pursuant to EO 1398577 revealed a range of barriers underserved communities face when
accessing DOE's procurement, funding, R&D, and deployment processes and activities.
Promoting Energy Justice - implementing Justice40 Initiative - a plan to deliver 40% of
the overall benefits of climate investments to disadvantaged communities and inform
equitable research, development, and deployment within the DOE. With the beta launch
of the Energy Justice Dashboard (BETA), DOE is working to better understand how the
Department's funding and investments are distributed to overburdened and underserved
communities that have been left behind and unheard for too long. The Energy Justice
Dashboard (BETA) is a pilot data visualization tool that displays DOE-specific
investments in communities across the country experiencing disproportionately high and
adverse economic, human health, climate-related, environmental, and other cumulative
77 Executive Order (EO) 13985: Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government
38
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
impacts. The Dashboard displays DOE cost data - grants, cooperative agreements, and
contracts - from more than twenty-five DOE program offices, for the fiscal years 2019
to present.
19.4 Office of International Affairs (IA)
The Office of International Affairs coordinates Department efforts to ensure a unified voice in
DOE's international energy policy. IA works closely with other Federal departments and
agencies, and the private sector, to align DOE's international energy objectives with national
energy policies and activities. IA also coordinates and manages DOE cooperation with
counterparts from other nations and international organizations.
Among other areas, IA experts maintain extensive knowledge of the following issues:
Table 10: IA Areas and Issues
Area
Issues
International
Regional and country-specific energy policies and practices,
Energy Policy
technology developments, and market conditions in Africa, the
Americas, Asia, Europe, Eurasia, and the Middle East
Bilateral and multilateral energy treaties and obligations
International cooperation in science and technology
Regional and country-specific opportunities and barriers to energy
markets and services
Trade and investment trends in the global energy economy
International energy partnerships, commitments, and agreements
Clean energy policy, technology, and legislation
Technology
Research, development, and deployment (RD&D) strategies
Development and
Technology research portfolios and budgets
Deployment
Energy end-use technologies and standards, including efficiency in
buildings, transportation, and industry
Energy supply technologies and standards, including fossil fuels,
nuclear power, and renewable energy
Technical and non-technical barriers to technology
commercialization and deployment
IA initiatives include:
International Energy Commitments (IEC)
Clean Energy Ministerial
U.S.-Africa Cooperation
U.S.-Saudi Arabia Energy Cooperation
U.S.-UAE Energy Cooperation
39
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Natural Gas and LNG Options
Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas
International Energy Agency
North American Energy Cooperation
U.S.-China Energy Collaboration
U.S.-Israel
U.S.-India Energy Cooperation
U.S.-EU Energy Council
G-7 Energy Ministers Meeting
U.S.-Kazakhstan Energy Partnership
U.S.-Ukraine Energy Cooperation
The Partnership for Transatlantic Energy Cooperation
19.5 Artificial Intelligence & Technology Office (AITO)
The Artificial Intelligence & Technology Office (AITO) mission is to accelerate Al/machine
learning (ML)-enabled capabilities through strategic portfolio alignment, scaling department-
wide use cases that advance the agency's core missions, and advocating for program offices. In
addition, AITO provides advice on AI/ML strategies and expanding public, private and
international partnerships, policy, and innovations - all in support of National AI leadership and
innovation. One of its two primary mission areas includes conducting strategic portfolio analysis
and alignment of AI/ML investments78 ensuring alignment with national security priorities, and
facilitate department-wide trustworthy AI by conducting ongoing advisory and advocacy
services to the program offices.
In FY21 and FY22, AITO will conduct a comprehensive assessment of the AI/ML landscape
(current, target, and future state) to optimize strategic portfolio alignment79 In addition, the
strategy will formulate prioritized implementations and support answering common questions,
including:
Mission: How can we better apply AI investments to address the Department's missions
and policies (e.g., equity, energy justice, climate resilience, and cyber)?
Investments: How do we optimize DOE AI investments for impact?
Cybersecurity: How can we support the development and deployment of AI as a force
multiplier for DOE cyber strategy?
Complex Problem Solving: Are we strategically planning to use AI to mitigate risks and
solve complex challenges - mainly where there are no data sets (e.g., explosives, cyber,
and nuclear)?
Emerging AI: What are next-generation AI practices, and where are gaps in current
investments versus mission needs?
78 AITO Program Plan 11-10-2021. pdf (energy.gov), page 3
79
AITO Program Plan 11-10-2021 pdf (energy.gov). page 4
40
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Leadership: How do we better partner across communities to apply holistic synergies
and international AI leadership?
19.6
Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
The Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) leads the Department's IT reform initiatives.
In an increasingly complex and hostile cyber landscape, the OCIO is fully committed to
stewarding DOE information assets by:
Leveraging existing information technology and expertise to maximize mission
accomplishment and reduce costs
Identifying and fostering new and emerging information technology to maximize mission
accomplishment and reduce costs
Providing Departmental IT governance, policy, and oversight processes to ensure secure,
efficient, and cost-effective use of IT resources
Ensuring acceptable risk-based cybersecurity by enhancing enterprise situational
awareness, developing near real-time risk management, and combating advanced
persistent threats
More specifically, the OCIO is responsible for the management of:
Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) program 80
including providing implementation and self-assessment guidance;
DOE IT Governance (i.e., Cyber Council);
Enterprise IT Project Management Office (ePMO);
DOE Section 508 Program;
DOE IT Budget and Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC);
IT Policy;
Data Governance, including roles and responsibilities of the Chief Data Officer (i.e., data
management, privacy and confidentiality, and data access, and required to participate in
the federal government-wide Chief Data Officers council);
Paperwork Reduction Act; and,
Government-wide IT initiatives.
In addition, the OCIO also establishes the Department's Information Resource Management
(IRM) Strategy81 which places emphasis on IT performance reviews in the annual DOE
Performance, Evaluations, and Measurement Plan (PEMP) process, providing greater oversight
by formally including the DOE CIO and CIOs from across the enterprise in the review process.
80 U.S. Department of Energy Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) Common
Baseline Implementation Plan and Self-Assessment I Department of Energy
81
FY 2018-2022 Information Resource Management (IRM) Strategy I Department of Energy
41
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
The OCIO also sets expectations via the Department's Cyber Security Strategy 82pertaining to the
evaluation of/establishing metrics for DOE's Cybersecurity Posture.
19.7
Office of Management (MA)
The Office of Management (MA) is the Department of Energy's central management
organization providing leadership in such mission critical areas as project and acquisition
management. In addition, MA manages the Department's Headquarters complex and provides
administrative support to employees in the Washington, DC area. This includes:
Table 11: MA Functions and Activities
Function
Activities
Aviation Management
The Mission of Aviation Management is to provide the Department
of Energy, including the National Nuclear Security Administration
(NNSA), with aviation policies, guidance, and program
management oversight that ensure the delivery of effective,
efficient, and safe aviation services required to support
accomplishment of all the DOE mission.
In accordance with the methods as described in OMB Circular A-
76, Performance of Commercial Activities, agencies must also
establish the cost effectiveness of all their aircraft operations every
five years. (41 CFR 102-33.200). The Comprehensive Aviation
Program Study IV (CAPS IV) was DOE's fourth report that fulfills
the requirements. The next CAPS report will commence in
FY2023.
CAPS I, published in 1999, determined the extent of aviation
activities needed to support DOE missions and validated the
appropriateness of the type of aviation operations used to
support those missions.
CAPS II, published in 2001, determined whether the aviation
assets used at each field element were the appropriate
compliment of aircraft and if those assets were the most cost-
effective aircraft to meet the field element's mission
requirements.
CAPS III was different from its predecessors as it was a
comprehensive data analysis of the costs, missions, and flight
hours from the data DOE/NNSA aviation programs submitted
82
DOE Cybersecurity Strategy 2018-2020 Department of Energy
42
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
into the Federal Aviation Interactive Reporting System
(FAIRS). The data analysis covered FY2000 through FY2012.
CAPS III also included the results of the implementation of the
recommendations from CAPS II.
CAPS IV, like CAPS III, is a comprehensive data analysis of
the costs, missions, and flight hours from the data in FAIRS for
fiscal years 2013-2017.
Executive Secretariat
The Executive Secretariat is organized into the following main
areas:
1. Document Management. The Executive Secretariat
receives, controls, and tracks correspondence and other
written and electronic documents, including classified
material. These documents are either addressed to the
Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, or members
of the Office of the Secretary staff, or they are sent to the
Department from the White House, the Congress, and
Tribal leaders. In addition, The Executive Secretariat sets
standards for document preparation through its
Correspondence Guide. Information and guidance on the
standards for document preparation, document handling and
concurrence (or Collaborative Action Process [CAP]), are
available to Departmental personnel under the Executive
Secretariat on the Department's Powerpedia. Using the draft
DOE directives online review, comment, and approval
system (RevCom), the Executive Secretariat manages and
supports the collaborative development, review, approval,
and dissemination of new and revised Departmental
Directives.
2. Executive Commitments and Information Management.
The Executive Secretariat is the focal point for the
dissemination of information, particularly electronic
information, throughout the Department. It provides
information including executive messages, correspondence
and executive commitments reports, and information about
important events or development opportunities for
Department and contractor staff.
3. Advisory Committee Management. The Executive
Secretariat provides management support on the creation,
direction, and termination of advisory committees, in
accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act and
43
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
implementing regulations. This function includes
identifying issues that require attention of Department
officials and Office of the Secretary staff. The Deputy
Director of the Office of the Executive Secretariat serves as
the Advisory Committee Management Officer for the
Department.
4. Executive Records Management. The Executive
Secretariat serves as the central Department records
repository for all official documents and departmental
actions and decisions, including classified material, for the
Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and Under Secretaries.
5. Conference Approval Management. The Executive
Secretariat coordinates the DOE Conference Approval
process for conferences exceeding $100k in DOE costs
which require Under Secretarial or Deputy Secretary
approval.
6. Official History and Archives. The Executive Secretariat
prepares the official history of the Department and guides
departmental staff on the collection and preservation of
historical records of the Department and its predecessor
agencies and serves as the Department's institutional
memory. The Chief Historian serves as the Department's
Federal Preservation Officer.
7. Ad Hoc Support to the Office of the Secretary. The
Executive Secretariat regularly responds to special requests
from the Office of the Secretary. Requests include
preparation of briefing papers and talking points and
coordinating particular Department-wide activities. The
Secretariat coordinates information security as well as
information technology for the Office of the Secretary.
Sustainability
As a part of the Office of Asset Management, the Sustainability
Performance
Performance Division (SPD), formerly known as the Sustainability
Performance Office (SPO), provides support to the Department of
Energy by guiding programs to achieve and maintain sustainability
goals in accordance with statutory and executive order
requirements. This is accomplished through data collection,
analysis, reporting, outreach, and frequent communications with
programs to share knowledge and best practices, furthering our
mission across the Department.
SPD tracks performance for the Department, and reports progress
towards sustainability goals to the Office of Management and
44
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
Budget (OMB), White House Council for Environmental Quality
(CEQ), and Congress through the Sustainability Report and
Implementation Plan (SRIP) and other related reports:
U.S. Department of Energy Sustainability Reporting
Department of Energy
Sustainability Dashboard: Home (doe.gov)
2020 DOE Sustainability Report and Implementation Plan
Office of the Federal Chief Sustainability Officer Federal
Agency Progress Data and Scorecards
DOE Vulnerability Assessment and Resilience Planning
(VARP) Guidance 2021x.docx (live.com)
Department of Energy FY 2020 OMB Scorecard
(sustainability.gov
DOE's Historic OMB Scorecards Department of
Energy
Energy Reduction at HQ
Office of Administration Environmental Management System
(EMS) sets policy managing Department of Energy HQ facilities.
This includes:
Minimizing and preventing pollution from entering the
environment.
Achieving and maintaining compliance with all applicable
environmental laws, regulations, and administrative
policies.
Continually improving the EMS by conducting annual
system reviews and implementing modifications based on
those reviews.
Real Estate
Real Estate is part of the Office of Asset Management within the
Office of Management (MA). Under the guidance of the Senior
Real Property Officer, the Office of Asset Management is
responsible for the Department of Energy's real estate functions.
Real estate functions encompass several key activities over the life
cycle of real property assets including the planning, acquisition,
management, and disposition, and providing technical support to all
the Programs of the Department, all of which are reflected in:
DOE Asset Management Plan Department of Energy
Excess Property Available for Economic Redevelopment
Department of Energy
45
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
Per 41 CFR Part 102-84, Annual Real Property Inventories, and
DOE Order 430.1C Real Property Asset Management, the
Department annual submits data - from DOE's Facilities
Information Management System (FIMS) and Condition
Assessment Information System (CAIS) - to comprise the Federal
Real Property Profile.
Facilities and
The Facilities and Infrastructure (F&I) Team is part of the Office of
Infrastructure
Asset Management within the Office of Management (MA). Under
the direction of the Senior Real Property Officer, and with the
support from real property holding program offices, this team
develops and maintains policies and procedures for real property
asset management and provides corporate implementation
oversight.
Federal Advisory
The Federal Advisory Committee Management Program assures
Committee Management
the Department of Energy's overall compliance with the Federal
Advisory Committee Act (FACA). The program is located in
the Office of the Executive Secretariat.
Active Committees
Advanced Scientific Computing Advisory
Committee (ASCAC)
Appliance Standard and Rulemaking Federal Advisory
Committee (ASRAC)
Basic Energy Sciences Advisory Committee (BESAC)
Biological and Environmental Research Advisory
Committee (BERAC)
Biomass Research and Development Technical Advisory
Committee
Defense Programs Federal Advisory Committee (DPAC)
DOE/NSF Nuclear Science Advisory Committee (NSAC)
Electricity Advisory Committee (EAC)
Environmental Management Advisory Board (EMAB)
Environmental Management Site-Specific Advisory
Boards (EM SSAB)
Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory Committee (FESAC)
High Energy Physics Advisory Panel (HEPAP)
46
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technical Advisory
Committee (HTAC)
Methane Hydrate Advisory Committee (MHAC)
National Coal Council (NCC)
National Petroleum Council (NPC)
Nuclear Energy Advisory Committee (NEAC)
President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology (PCAST)
Secretary of Energy Advisory Board (SEAB)
State Energy Advisory Board (STEAB)
Inactive Committees
Technical Advisory Committee on Verification of Fissile
Materials and Nuclear Warheads
Technical Panel on Magnetic Fusion
Hydrogen Technical Panel
Freedom of Information
Annual FOIA reports can be found here:
Act (FOIA)
FOIA Annual Reports Department of Energy
Personal Property
Personal Property Policy is part of the Office of Asset Management
within the Office of Management (MA), and includes:
Advising and providing staff assistance to headquarters and
field organizations that perform personal property
management functions
Establishing performance-based personal property
management objectives, measures, expectations
Evaluating federal and contractor personal property
management systems, functions, operations, procedures,
and self-assessment programs
Collecting and consolidating critical data (excess personal
property, precious metals recovery, exchange/sales actions,
property furnished to non-Federal recipients, and supply
activities) to assist leadership decision making
Preparing agency reports providing an analysis of data for
trends, anomalies to detect and correct problems which may
have enterprise-wide impact
Serving as:
47
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
Career manager for establishing and administering
the personal property management career
development program
DOE National Utilization Officer responsible for
promoting acquisition and utilization of excess
personal property
Acquisition and
The Office of Acquisition Management (OAM) is responsible for
Financial Assistance
all contracting, financial assistance and related activities to fulfill
the Department's multitude of missions through its business
relationships. Key policy and guidance include:
Balanced Scorecard performance measures, targets, and
program description
Benefit Value Study Desk Manual
Cost Study Manual
PERT Review for Contractors' Purchasing Systems
Certifications and
Acquisition ANSWERS - Dept of Energy - MAX Federal
Professional
Community, which provides additional information on:
Development
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Acquisition Career Management Program (ACMP)
FIELD ASSISTANCE AND OVERSIGHT
Procurement Management Review
Collaboration area
STRATEGIC PROGRAMS
Category Management
FAIR Act
Purchase Card
PERT
Service Contract Inventory
REPORTING
Generating reports to assist in management and
performance tracking
48
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Function
Activities
SINGLE AUDIT
Single Audit and For-Profit Audit of Grants and Other
Financial Assistance Awards
COMMUNITIES OF PRACTICE COLLABORATION
AREAS
Strategic Partnership Projects Community of Practice
Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Community of
Practice
Procurement Systems Working Group
Federal PRISM User Group
DOE Acquisition Council
M&O Subcontract Reporting Capability
KNOWLEDGE SHARING
Data Quality - Lessons Learned/Best Practices
19.8
Office of Project Management
The Office of Project Management (PM) is was established as a new DOE element on July 12,
2015 to be the Department of Energy's Enterprise Project Management Organization (EPMO),
providing leadership and assistance in developing and implementing DOE-wide policies,
procedures, programs, and management systems pertaining to project management, and
independently monitors, assesses, and reports on project execution performance. The office
validates project performance baselines-scope, cost, and schedule-of the Department's largest
construction and environmental clean-up projects prior to budget request to Congress-an active
project portfolio totaling over $30 billion. The office also serves as Executive Secretariat for the
Department's Energy Systems Acquisition Advisory Board (ESAAB) and the Project
Management Risk Committee (PMRC). In these capacities, the Director is accountable to the
Deputy Secretary.
PM provides a monthly assessment of DOE's portfolio of capital assets projects, which is
summarized in the monthly Project Dashboard report. This report assesses all active projects
with an established performance baseline, including scope, cost, and schedule. Based on current
performance:
GREEN projects are expected to meet their performance baseline
YELLOW projects are at-risk of breaching their performance baselines
RED projects are expected to breach their performance baselines
49
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Other analysis/reports include:
Root Cause Analysis Report (RCA) 2008: identifies the key elements necessary to make the
meaningful changes required to consistently deliver projects within cost and schedule
performance parameters.
Corrective Action Plan (CAP) 2008: Ensures that the root causes identified in the Root Cause
Analysis report (above) are addressed with meaningful and lasting solutions to improve
contract and project management performance.
RCA/CAP Closure Report of 2011: Presents a status of the Department's initiatives to
address the most significant issues and their corresponding root causes and officially closes
out most of the issues and root causes.
19.9
Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO)
The Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO) is responsible for strategically
aligning the agency's workforce to its missions through effective management of human capital
policies and programs. The Chief Human Capital Officer advises and assists the Secretary and
Deputy Secretary of Energy, and other agency officials, in recruiting, developing, training, and
managing a highly skilled, productive, and diverse workforce in accordance with merit system
principles and all applicable statutory requirements.
The Strategic Human Capital Plan (SHCP) sets forth the framework for managing the
Department of Energy's (DOE) human capital system. This Plan aligns with DOE Strategic Plan
and the cross-agency priority goals of the President's Management Agenda.
OCHCO functions, all of which support implementation of the SHCP, include:
Advancing and supporting DOE's mission accomplishment by creating OCHCO
management in the areas of recruitment, hiring and staffing, motivation and employee
engagement, succession planning, learning and development, and retention; and provides
the full range of operational human resources and management advisory services to DOE
staff.
Providing leadership and direction in dealings with the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM), Government Accountability Office (GAO), the Merit Systems Protection Board
(MSPB), Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA) and other Federal/non-Federal
organizations relative to human capital programs and policies.
Provides corporate oversight of the HR Shared Service Centers and subordinate offices
ensuring consultative advice and solutions are offered to management officials and
employees in all operational aspects of human capital management.
19.9.1 Office of Human Capital Assessments and Compliance (HC-1.2)
The Office of Human Capital Assessments and Compliance (HC-1.2) serves as the human capital
compliance arm for the Department. It is responsible for managing and administering DOE's
50
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Human Capital Management Assessment Program (HCMAP). The Office provides a system for
monitoring and analyzing agency performance on all aspects of human capital management
policies, programs, and activities. Ensures that all human capital activities function in support of
DOE's mission accomplishment and that those activities and results are effective, efficient, and
in compliance with merit system principles and associated human capital laws and regulations.
HC-1.2's functions include:
Conduct human capital assessment reviews of all servicing HR offices/Shared Service
Centers across the Department to assess levels of effectiveness and efficiency and
adherence to legal and regulatory requirements.
Develop quantitative and qualitative measures to assess HR programs effectiveness,
efficiency, and compliance.
Conduct fact-finding inquiries and draft responses to third party offices regarding human
capital complaints.
Provide comprehensive analysis and metrics to determine overall efficiency and
effectiveness of human capital programs and to identify trends.
Conduct human capital program management evaluations to provide proactive support to
servicing HR offices or DOE Elements, and develop improvement plans for HR offices
that have HR authorities suspended and coordinate with other operational offices to assist
in implementation.
19.9.2 Office of Employee and Labor Relations, Policy, and Oversight (HC-1.3)
The Office of Employee and Labor Relations, Policy, and Oversight (HC-1.3) provides
Employee and Labor Relations services and counsel to management officials. These
responsibilities include policy development and interpretation of employee and labor relations
matters. HC-1.3 is staffed with specialists providing employee and labor relations products and
advisory services including contract administration, leading negotiations, and addressing the
dispute resolution needs of both HQ and assigned field sites.
HC-1.3 functions include:
Providing guidance, consultation, advice and assistance to managers, supervisors, and
employees on grievances, appeals, adverse actions, employee discipline, and other
employee relations matters.
Providing labor relations direction and counsel to management officials, including
interpretation of content and intent of local bargaining agreement(s), relevant case law,
and applicable precedent.
Representing management in third-party labor relations disputes including unfair labor
practice and representation hearings before the Federal Labor Relations Authority and in
impasse proceedings before the Federal Services Impasses Panel.
Formulating, interpreting, and executing agency-wide policy, plans and procedures
related to employee relations and labor relations program areas.
51
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
19.9.3 HR Shared Service Centers
OCHCO's Shared Service Centers provide a full range of HR services:
Table 12: HR Shared Service Centers
HR Service Center
Functions
Oak Ridge HR
Implement and monitor staffing transactions for the programs and offices
Shared Service
served by the SSC to recruit, examine and place selectees for vacant
Center
positions. Responsibilities include (but are not limited to) preparing and
posting USAJobs vacancy announcements, evaluating applicants and
issuing selection certificate(s) to hiring officials, and preparing and
processing pre-employment paperwork to assist selectees in the onboarding
process.
Suitability adjudication - Make determinations based on eight basic factors
and seven additional considerations, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 731 and
the OPM Federal Investigative Service Suitability Processing Handbook
Manage the classification program, processes, and procedures for new and
existing positions in the programs and offices served by the SSC to
determine their appropriate pay system, occupational grouping, grade, title,
and bargaining unit status.
Administer the benefits and work-life programs for the current and former
employees, annuitants, survivors, and eligible family members of the
offices served by the SSC. Responsibilities include (but are not limited to)
providing servicing and consultation related to life, health, dental, vision,
and long-term care insurances, Flexible Spending Accounts, Thrift Savings
Plan, retirement planning and calculations, Employee Assistance Program,
drug testing program, and workers' compensation.
HR processing and information management responsibilities for the
programs and offices served by the SSC and the Office of Corporate
Executive Management's customers (i.e., executives). Responsibilities
include (but are not limited to) processing personnel actions, entering and
maintaining employee data to DOE's Corporate Human Resources
Information System (CHRIS) and other personnel systems, establishing and
maintaining employees' electronic Official Personnel Folder (eOPF).
Provide strategic human capital guidance and HR solutions implementation
support to all levels of management. Assess and anticipate HR related needs
and formulate partnerships across the HR function to deliver value added
services to management and employees that reflect the business objectives
of the organization
Provide the full spectrum of Employee Relations/Labor Relations services
to management and employees.
Bonneville Power
Implement and monitor staffing transactions for the programs and offices
Administration HR
served by the BPA SC to recruit, examine and place selectees for vacant
Service Center
positions. Responsibilities include (but are not limited to) preparing and
posting USAJOBS vacancy announcements, evaluating applicants and
issuing selection certificate(s) to hiring officials, and preparing and
52
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
HR Service Center
Functions
processing pre-employment paperwork to assist selectees in the onboarding
process.
Manage the classification program, processes, and procedures for new and
existing positions in the programs and offices served by the BPA SC to
determine their appropriate pay system, occupational grouping, grade, title,
and bargaining unit status.
Administer the benefits and work-life programs for the current and former
employees, annuitants, survivors, and eligible family members of the
offices served by the BPA SC. Responsibilities include (but are not limited
to) providing servicing and consultation related to life, health, dental,
vision, and long-term care insurances, Flexible Spending Accounts, Thrift
Savings Plan, retirement planning and calculations, Employee Assistance
Program, drug testing program, and workers' compensation.
HR processing and information management responsibilities for the
programs and offices served by the BPA SC. Responsibilities include (but
are not limited to) processing personnel actions, entering and maintaining
employee data to DOE's Corporate Human Resources Information System
(CHRIS) and other personnel systems, establishing and maintaining
employees' electronic Official Personnel Folder (eOPF) in accordance with
OPM regulations, and supporting personnel data requests from DOE and
OPM.
Power Marketing
Implement and monitor staffing transactions for the programs and offices
Administration HR
served by the PMA SSC to recruit, examine and place selectees for vacant
Service Center
positions. Responsibilities include (but are not limited to) preparing and
posting USAJobs vacancy announcements, evaluating applicants and
issuing selection certificate(s) to hiring officials, and preparing and
processing pre-employment paperwork to assist selectees in the onboarding
process.
Manage the classification program, processes, and procedures for new and
existing positions in the programs and offices served by the PMA SSC to
determine their appropriate pay system, occupational grouping, grade, title,
and bargaining unit status.
Administer the benefits and work-life programs for the current and former
employees, annuitants, survivors, and eligible family members of the
offices served by the PMA SSC. Responsibilities include (but are not
limited to) providing servicing and consultation related to life, health,
dental, vision, and long-term care insurances, Flexible Spending Accounts,
Thrift Savings Plan, retirement planning and calculations, Employee
Assistance Program, drug testing program, and workers' compensation.
HR processing and information management responsibilities for the
programs and offices served by the PMA SSC. Responsibilities include (but
are not limited to) processing personnel actions, entering and maintaining
employee data to DOE's Corporate Human Resources Information System
(CHRIS) and other personnel systems, establishing and maintaining
employees' electronic Official Personnel Folder (eOPF) in accordance with
53
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
HR Service Center
Functions
OPM regulations, and supporting personnel data requests from DOE and
OPM.
19.9.4 Office of Corporate Services (HC-10)
The Office of Corporate Services (HC-10) supports the program objectives and missions of all
Departmental components by:
(1) Developing Department-level human capital management (HCM) policies and
associated technical training, advice, and guidance on human capital policies;
(2) Developing HCM legislative proposals;
(3) Providing operational support and consultative advice on the acquisition,
deployment, and maintenance of technology to support the strategic management
of human capital in accomplishing Departmental goals and program objectives;
(4) Supporting implementation of the Department's human capital initiatives through
the integration of human capital strategy and budget across the human resources
line of business functions; and,
(5) Offering innovative business solutions to complex Departmental HCM
challenges. Human capital management strategies, policy, programs, and plans
are developed and assessed for overall effectiveness and compliance with merit
system principles, civil service laws and regulations, and Departmental HCM
directives.
HC-10 is the primary representative body for the Department when coordinating on HCM policy
compliance with the OPM, OMB, GAO, and other Federal and non-Federal customers and
organizations in connection with Departmental human resources and human capital management
areas of responsibility.
HC-10 functions include:
Manage the development of HCM-related policies and strategies for agency-wide
implementation and provide advice and guidance across the Department on these
policies; seek out, influence, and translate legislative and regulatory direction into
Departmental strategies, policies, and programs to address DOE human capital needs.
Provide executive oversight of the acquisition, deployment, and maintenance of
technology to support the strategic management of human capital. Manages HRIT
systems and provides technology solutions for the Department's HR operations.
Provide oversight and guidance on the integration of human capital strategy and budget
to ensure effective and efficient financial management of resources within the OCHCO
and associated HR business lines. Oversee the procurement process for obtaining and
implementing contract support within the OCHCO and the HR Shared Service Centers.
Manage the administrative support functions for the OCHCO to include space,
equipment, personnel security, transit subsidy, internal HC policy and front office
executive support.
54
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Develop business intelligence, demographic and trends analyses in support of corporate
workforce and succession planning and in response to requests from within DOE and
from external oversight agencies.
Develop, analyze, and communicate human capital metrics to determine the efficiency
and effectiveness of human capital strategies and solutions.
19.9.5 Office of Talent Management (HC-20)
The Office of Talent Management (HC-20) is dedicated to recruiting, engaging, developing,
retaining and advancing a diverse workforce of right-fit talent for the Department. As a steward
and facilitator of the talent strategy, OTM provides employees and supervisors with a wide range
of resources, including talent sourcing, professional development, leadership training and
educational opportunities to cultivate individual and organizational excellence.
HC-20 functions include:
Managing workforce development programs and evaluate their effectiveness to ensure
that they improve performance and transfer knowledge and skills to DOE employees.
Providing guidance and resources to define, assess, and close critical workforce
competency skill gaps.
Establishing and managing a centralized recruitment and outreach program in support of
the goals and mission of DOE.
Leading and directing the promotion of DOE as an employer of choice through targeted
branding and communication
Establishing, supporting, and monitoring strategic approaches to achieving and sustaining
continuous improvement in DOE workforce engagement and organizational
effectiveness.
19.9.6 Office of Corporate Executive Management (HC-40)
The Office of Corporate Executive Management (HC-40) manages the human capital programs
related to the employment lifecycle for the Department's Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior
Professional (Senior-Level and Scientific and Professional), Excepted Service (EJ, EK, ER, ET
and EWQ) and political appointees.
HC-40 functions include:
Developing, formulating, and administering policies and strategies for agency-wide
implementation and providing advice and guidance across the Department on these
policies.
Assessing and improving customer service and human capital programs providing
innovative and strategic solutions enabling the recruitment, development and retention of
a premier executive workforce prepared to lead the Department and ensure America's
security and prosperity by addressing its energy, environmental, and nuclear challenges.
55
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Providing strategic and operational centralized HR services, including (but not limited to)
staffing, recruitment, employee relations, compensation, benefits, position classification
and allocation, executive development, talent management and performance
management.
Managing the Department's allocations and coordinating the biennial allocation process.
Providing support for Presidential, Non-Career SES and Schedule C appointees.
Coordinating and managing the Executive Resources Board processes.
19.10 Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU)
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) maximizes contract
opportunities for small businesses while advancing the Agency's missions. OSDBU's
History dates back to when Public Law 95-507 (October 1978) amended the original Small
Business Investment Act of 1958 (SBAct). Public Law 95-507 established the requirement for
every Federal Agency to have an Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
(OSDBU) to make Federal procurements more readily accessible to all small businesses.
To execute and support its mission, the OSDBU has developed three Strategic Objectives:
Objective 1: Making it easier for small businesses to do business with the DOE.
Objective 2: Maximizing small business opportunities by cultivating more productive
relationships with internal DOE stakeholders.
Objective 3: Maximizing small business awards and improving socio-economic category
performance.
The Strategic Objectives are achieved through use of the following Enabling Activities:
OSDBU Staff and Cadre of Small Business Program Managers (SBPMs);
Education and Resources;
OSDBU Compliance Requirements; and
Inreach/Outreach.
Every year, the Small Business Administration (SBA) works with each agency to set their prime
and subcontracting goals and their grades are based on the agreed upon goals. Each federal
agency has a different small business contracting goal, negotiated annually in consultation with
the SBA. The SBA ensures that all the goals meet the 23 percent target for the federal
government as well as the socio-economic goals established by statute. The latest SBA Scorecard
can be found here: DOE FY 2020 Small Business Procurement Scorecard.
SBDU Annual Reports provide a comprehensive review of DOE performance in engaging small
businesses. These reports contain a broad overview of small business prime contracts, first-tier
Management and Operating (M&O) Subcontracts, and other subcontracts to small business.
56
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
19.11 Office of General Counsel (GC)
The Office of General Counsel (GC) is charged by the Secretary of Energy with the authority to
determine the Department's authoritative position on any question of law. GC provides legal
advice, counsel, and support to the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, and program offices
throughout DOE to further the Department's mission of advancing the national, economic, and
energy security of the United States through scientific and technological innovation and the
environmental cleanup of the national nuclear weapons complex.
GC services include:
Table 13: GC Services/Analysis
GC Element
Service (i.e., Analysis)
Administration (GC-20)
The Deputy General Counsel for Administration directs, manages,
supervises and coordinates the activities and functions assigned to
the following offices:
Assistant General Counsel for Ethics and Personnel Law
Associate General Counsel for Fiscal and Information Law
Litigation, Regulation &
The Deputy General Counsel for Litigation, Regulation and
Enforcement
Enforcement directs, manages, supervises and coordinates the
(GC-30)
activities and functions assigned to the following Assistant
General Counsels responsible for:
Litigation
Enforcement
Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency
Environment
The Deputy General Counsel for Environment
& Compliance
and Compliance directs, manages, supervises and coordinates the
(GC-50)
activities and functions assigned to the following Assistant
General Counsels responsible for:
Environment
International and National Security Programs
NEPA Policy and Compliance
Transactions,
The Deputy General Counsel for Transactions, Technology, &
Technology, &
Contractor Human Resources directs, manages, supervises and
Contractor Human
Resources
(GC-60)
57
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
GC Element
Service (i.e., Analysis)
coordinates the activities and functions assigned to the following
Assistant General Counsels responsible for:
Procurement and Financial Assistance
Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property
Contractor Human Resources
Energy Policy
The Deputy General Counsel for Energy Policy directs, manages,
(GC-70)
supervises and coordinates the activities and functions assigned to
the following Assistant General Counsels responsible for:
Civilian Nuclear Programs
Standard Contract Management
Electricity and Fossil Energy
Office of the Chief
The mission of the Loan Programs Office is to accelerate the
Counsel for Loans
domestic commercial deployment of innovative and advanced
Programs
clean energy technologies at a scale sufficient to contribute
meaningfully to the achievement of our national clean energy
objectives-including job creation; reducing dependency on
foreign oil; improving our environmental legacy; and enhancing
American competitiveness in the global economy of the 21st
century.
Office of the Chief
The Advanced Projects Research Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) was
Counsel for ARPA-E
established in 2007 to fund the development and deployment of
transformational energy technologies in the United States.
Field Counsel Offices
The Department of Energy employs a complement of lawyers
who work in each of the Department's Operations Offices and
Field Offices under the leadership of a Chief Counsel.
19.12 Office of Policy (OP)
The Office of Policy (OP) provides expertise related to domestic energy and climate policy
issues, including technology policy; deployment and infrastructure policy; state, local, and tribal
policy; and energy jobs.
19.12.1 Technology Policy
The Office of Technology Policy leads U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) efforts to identify
technology innovations and strategies that will help achieve national energy and climate
priorities. It provides overall DOE strategic direction and centralized coordination of science,
58
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
energy, and technology research, development, and deployment-to advance dependable,
affordable, and environmentally responsible production, delivery, and use of energy.
The Office of Technology Policy supports DOE policies, activities, and strategies, consistent
with the national energy plan. These efforts aim to advance domestic collaboration on
innovation, science, and technology research and demonstration to accelerate energy technology
development to transform the energy sector in the long term.
Focus areas include:
Energy Innovation - To meet national goals, the Office of Technology Policy is
working to identify innovation opportunities that will address climate change and
facilitate the nation's transition to a cleaner, domestic, and more secure energy future.
Energy Earthshots Initiative - Through the Energy Earthshots Initiative, DOE will
accelerate breakthroughs of more abundant, affordable, and reliable clean energy
solutions within the decade. Using an all-hands-on-deck approach, DOE will leverage
diverse expertise and talent at American universities, businesses, and national
laboratories to accelerate research and development and tackle the toughest remaining
barriers to quickly deploy emerging clean energy technologies at scale.
National Climate Strategy - Addressing the climate crisis requires immediate and
sustained investment to eliminate net global greenhouse gas emissions by mid-century.
Investing in the clean technologies, infrastructure, workforce, and systems of the future
creates an unprecedented opportunity to improve quality of life and create vibrant,
sustainable, resilient, and equitable economies.
FACT SHEET: President Biden Renews U.S. Leadership on World Stage at U.N.
Climate Conference (COP26)
The Long-Term Strategy of the United States: Pathways to 2050 Net-Zero
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
19.12.2 Deployment and Infrastructure Policy
The Office of Deployment and Infrastructure Policy serves as the focal point within the U.S.
Department of Energy for the policy design and analysis of supply chains, domestic
manufacturing, and other key topics. It supports the development of long-term strategies and
integrated policies and programs to accelerate and scale clean energy deployment, including both
energy supply and energy efficiency.
Focus areas include:
Supply Chains - In response to the Supply Chain Executive Order, DOE is working to
better understand the clean energy manufacturing supply chain. The analysis focuses on
supply chain issues and opportunities with significant potential to enhance U.S.
59
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
competitiveness and generate high quality jobs to help meet national security, energy, and
climate objectives.
100-Day Report on High-Capacity Electric Vehicle Batteries
DOE Announces Actions to Bolster Domestic Supply Chain of Advanced
Batteries
Clean Energy Reliability - Climate change and cyber threats are increasingly putting
the reliability and resilience of our power system at risk. Investing in clean energy
solutions will tackle climate change, grow our economy, and deliver affordable, reliable,
and secure electricity to all Americans.
19.12.3 State, Local, and Tribal Policy
The Office of State, Local, and Tribal Policy guides the development and implementation of
coordinated, comprehensive strategies to assist states, territories, local authorities, and tribes in
analyzing, assessing, and implementing energy policies, programs, and related activities.
It also helps ensure that national energy policies, programs, and related activities are informed by
the policies, programs, regulations, and practices of state, local, and tribal governments.
Focus areas include:
Communities LEAP - The DOE Communities LEAP (Local Energy Action Program)
Pilot seeks to help communities access the economic and environmental benefits of clean
energy and clean energy manufacturing. Under this pilot initiative, DOE will provide
supportive services valued at up to a total of $16 million to support 24-36 communities to
develop their own community-driven clean energy transition approach. This opportunity
is specifically open to low-income, energy-burdened communities that are experiencing
either direct environmental justice impacts, or direct economic impacts from a shift away
from historical reliance on fossil fuels.
Place-based Strategy - Place-based approaches aim to strengthen communities (usually
defined at a scale where measurable economic outcomes can be achieved-from a
neighborhood up through a multi-county region), rather than provide direct assistance to
individuals, companies, or technologies. DOE is focusing on place-based approaches
through a variety of cross-agency initiatives, such as Justice40. DOE's place-based
approaches target specific energy- or technology-related challenges and opportunities of
each community, with the goal of supporting each region's transition to a more
prosperous, sustainable, resilient, and inclusive future.
Cross-DOE Collaboration - The Office of Policy coordinates with DOE programs and
staff offices to lead strategic thinking, working to achieve U.S. energy goals. The Office
of Policy also provides policy analysis support to DOE program and staff offices for
Departmental mission objectives.
60
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
19.12.4 Energy Jobs
The Office of Energy Jobs focuses on supporting the creation of jobs in the energy sector,
particularly jobs that guarantee high standards and the right to collective bargaining. Energy Jobs
works collaboratively across the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and with other federal
agencies and regulatory bodies to ensure the successful transition to a zero-emissions economy
while creating meaningful job opportunities for all Americans.
A pivotal component of the successful transition of the American energy sector is ensuring that
both job creation and job impacts are taken into consideration in DOE funding, initiatives, and
priorities. The Office of Energy Jobs leads efforts to align energy workforce building and
training programs and publish the annual U.S. Energy and Employment Report.
Focus areas include:
U.S. Energy and Employment Report - The U.S. Energy and Employment Report
(USEER) provides a comprehensive overview of the energy labor market. The USEER
offers unique insights into the individuals who meet the nation's energy needs, identifies
important trends and skillsets for the 21st century energy workforce, and provides data on
employment trends in five major energy sectors - Electric Power Generation;
Transmission, Distribution, and Storage; Fuels; Energy Efficiency; and Motor Vehicles.
DOE Labor Working Group - The DOE Labor Working Group is a forum for DOE
and labor unions to engage on key energy topics.
19.13 Office of Public Affairs (PA)
The DOE Office of Public Affairs (PA) is responsible for counsel and support for:
Articulating and disseminating enterprise-level messages for use by DOE leadership and
stakeholders;
Identifying opportunities to develop new content and share existing content about DOE's
portfolio;
Helping media outlets understand and report DOE-sponsored research;
Identifying DOE's key stakeholders, and keeping them informed of DOE work; and,
Monitoring media, legislative, and stakeholder communications to advise senior agency
officials about emerging news and public affairs issues and concerns.
19.14 Office of Technology Transitions (OTT)
The Office of Technology Transitions (OTT) was established in 2015 to oversee and advance the
mission of technology transfer by expanding the public impact of the department's research and
development (R&D) portfolio to advance the economic, energy and national security interests of
the nation. OTT develops the Department's policy and vision for expanding the commercial
61
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
impact of its research investments, and it streamlines information and access to DOE's national
labs and sites to foster partnerships to move innovations from the labs into the marketplace.
"Technology transitions" is a dynamic process, with numerous and varying handoffs between
scientists, innovators, and entrepreneurs, that begins with an idea that ultimately becomes a
technology commercialized by the private sector. Every technology follows its own unique path
and requires a variety of exchanges and partnerships to advance it along the developmental
spectrum. OTT provides support in each step of this process.
OTT conducts data management and analysis, evidence-based impact evaluations, and
stakeholder engagement. The office also oversees two major DOE initiatives, the Technology
Commercialization Fund (TCF) and the Lab Partnering Service. Additionally, OTT implements
public laws passed by Congress. The office derives much of its mission, responsibilities, and
oversight authority from the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation
Act of 1980, and Energy Policy Act of 2005. These legislations require OTT to develop two
reports to Congress annually- the "Technology Transitions Execution Plan" and the "Report on
Technology Transfer and Related Technology Partnering Activities at the National Laboratories
and Other Facilities."
The Chief Commercialization Officer serves as Director of the Office of Technology Transitions,
whose responsibilities include oversight of the TCF, Technology Transfer Working Group, and
the coordination of technology transfer activities and best practices across the DOE complex.
In addition, OTT provides and fosters the following resources:
Table 14: OTT Resources and Analysis
Resource
Description
Lab Partnering Service
Lab Partnering Service (LPS) offers unprecedented access to the world's
most advanced scientific facilities and researchers across the Department's
National Lab complex. LPS provides investors-ano other parties looking
to advance energy innovation-a single online platform to connect with
leading DOE National Laboratory technical experts to quickly answer
innovation questions, as well as discover opportunities for building
partnerships. Visitors can easily search hundreds of technologies, patents,
experts, facilities, and success stories tailored to their individual needs,
including:
Facility descriptions
Technical summaries
Visual Patent Search
Solutions Exchange
Solutions Exchange connects industry challenges with DOE-powered
innovations. Businesses share their technical or scientific challenges and
partnership interests with OTT and receive a menu of approaches to tackle
these hurdles in collaboration with our National Labs. With the OTT team
directly facilitating solutions development with the Labs, business are able
62
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Resource
Description
to quickly access resources and identify the best opportunities to move
forward.
InnovationXLab
InnovationXLab summits facilitate a two-way exchange of information and
ideas between industry, universities, manufacturers, investors, and end-use
customers with innovators and experts from across the National Labs and
broader DOE R&D complex.
InnovationXLab summits:
Catalyze public-private partnerships and commercial hand-offs
utilizing DOE's extensive assets: technology, intellectual property,
facilities, and world-leading scientists and researchers.
Engage the private sector to ensure DOE understands industry's
technical needs, risk appetite, and investment criteria, thereby
incorporating "market pull" into DOE's portfolio planning.
Inform DOE R&D planning to increase commercialization
possibilities.
InnovationXLab Summits are not dense technical workshops, but enable
connections and commercialization opportunities at the decision-maker
level. They highlight promising technologies from across all 17 DOE
National Labs.
Spotlights
OTT periodically releases reports highlighting the Department of Energy's
work in emerging technology areas, including energy storage, grid
optimization, and artificial intelligence. In addition, OTT compiles success
stories from selected DOE-derived research projects that have resulted in
commercial outcomes, celebrating the successful public-private
relationships that seek to drive U.S. innovation and ensure the nation's
continued competitiveness and security.
Market Analysis
The Market Analysis team at the OTT produces research in market analysis,
including trend forecasts, supply chain, and technology maturation, to
support OTT's mission of accelerating advanced energy technologies from
across the Department of Energy and National Lab complex. The goal is to
provide research to better integrate understanding and analysis of market
pull factors into the R&D process of novel technologies throughout the
development and commercialization processes.
The Market Analysis team leads the Market Analysis Community of
Practice (MACOP) at the Department, which is made up from
representatives from all 17 National Labs and meets monthly to share best
practices in market analysis and hear from expert speakers with deep
knowledge of various aspects of the commercialization process.
OTT also compiles market analysis reports, technology roadmaps, and
other analyses of technology-market fit and pathways to commercialization
63
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Resource
Description
from across the Department of Energy, which OTT have compiled to
highlight the most useful ones.
STEM Tools
To better connect students and universities with the necessary resources
they need to engage with the Department, OTT has compiled an array of
materials to help discover the best and most beneficial path forward.
OTT University Resources Toolkit 2020-2021
DOE Laboratory Partnership Opportunities for Colleges and
Universities
20.
Other Defense Activities
20.1
Office of Environment, Health, Safety, and Security (AU)
The Office of Environment, Health, Safety, and Security (AU) is the DOE's central organization
responsible for health, safety, environment, and security; providing corporate-level leadership
and strategic vision to coordinate and integrate these vital programs. AU is responsible for
policy development and technical assistance; safety analysis; and corporate safety and security
programs. The Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security advises
DOE Senior Leadership on all matters related to environment, health, safety, and security across
the complex. On May 5, 2014, the Office of the Associate Under Secretary for Environment,
Health, Safety and Security (AU) was established within the Office of the Under Secretary for
Management and Performance to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of primary mission-
support organizations of the Department and institute enterprise-wide solutions to common
challenges across the complex.
The Department synthesizes operational information to support continuous environment, health,
safety, and security improvements. DOE's corporate safety reporting and analysis programs and
activities are established to manage several viable safety indicators applicable to most DOE
contractor operations that provide Departmental leadership, line management, and stakeholders
with timely information to gauge the success of Departmental safety program implementation.
DOE operational and occurrence data are collected through various reporting mechanisms and
provided through internet-based tools, one of which is databases:
Comprehensive Epidemiologic Data Resource (CEDR) System: CEDR is a DOE public-
use repository of data from occupational and environmental health studies of workers at
DOE facilities and nearby community residents.
Computerized Accident/Incident Reporting System (CAIRS): This system collects and
analyzes DOE and DOE-contractor reports of injuries, illnesses, and other accidents that
occur during DOE operations.
DOE OPEXShare Lessons Learned database: The DOE OPEXShare is the central, web-
based collection point for corporate operating experience lessons learned and best
64
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
practices from across the DOE complex. DOE OPEXShare is a collaborative platform
that is available to government and private users. By sharing lessons learned and best
practices from work operations and project management, DOE OPEXShare subscribers
could prevent adverse events and improve processes and performance. DOE OPEXShare
replaces the DOE Corporate Lessons Learned database.
Fire Protection: Data collection and a commitment has been made to the Defense Nuclear
Facilities Safety Board to collect information and make it available utilizing a standard
systematic approach. This approach is accomplished via a web-based system which will
allow reporting organizations to enter or edit information. Use of the web interface
requires registration. DOE O-231.1B, Environment, Safety, And Health Reporting,
requires the submission of an Annual Fire Protection Summary.
Occurrence Reporting and Processing System (ORPS): This system provides timely
notification to the DOE complex of events that could adversely affect public or DOE
worker health and safety, the environment, national security, DOE's safeguards and
security interests, functioning of DOE facilities, or the Department's reputation.
Radiation Exposure Monitoring System (REMS): The REMS database tracks
occupational radiation exposures for all monitored DOE employees, contractors,
subcontractors, and members of the public. A password is not needed to access this
database.
Radiological Source Registry and Tracking (RSRT): The RSRT is a DOE database that is
maintained by the Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security (EHSS), Office of
Information Management (AU-72). The annual 10 CFR 835 Appendix E inventory data,
and the transaction and verification information for Category 1 and 2 radioactive sealed
sources will be reported to the RSRT Manager. Additional guidance for reporting
transactions for Category 1 and 2 sources to the DOE RSRT is provided in the December
16, 2010 Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer memorandum, Reporting for
Radiological Sealed Sources Transactions. The RSTS Manager is responsible for
reporting the transaction to the NRC NSTS.
Safety Basis Information System (SBIS): The SBIS database contains safety information
from DOE nuclear facilities. The SBIS website provides access to the following items: 1)
the Public Access Safety Basis Report; 2) the SBIS database (restricted password
protected access for DOE and DOE contractors only); and 3) the SBIS account request
page.
Suspect/Counterfeit and Defective Items: The Department of Energy is committed to
ensuring that items and components installed in safety-related or mission-critical
applications meet their intended function and operability requirements. Therefore, EHSS
has established a process for identifying Suspect/Counterfeit (S/CI) or Defective Items
65
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
(DI) that are deemed safety-significant and broadly applicable to DOE facilities and for
ensuring that action is taken.
20.2
Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA)
The Department of Energy's (DOE) Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA) performs
independent assessments for DOE senior leadership that report on whether national security
material and information assets are appropriately protected and whether Departmental operations
provide for the safety of its employees and the public. In addition, EA implements the
Department's congressionally-authorized contractor enforcement programs for security and
safety on behalf of the Secretary of Energy and operates the DOE National Training Center
(NTC).
Because EA reports directly to the Office of the Secretary, it is organizationally independent of
the DOE entities that develop and implement security and safety policies and programs;
therefore, EA can provide a "check and balance" function by objectively:
1. Observing and reporting on the performance of DOE federal and contractor
organizations' implementation of security and safety policies and programs,
2. Applying enforcement actions to contractor organizations for poor performance in
adhering to legally enforceable security and safety requirements, and
3. Developing and delivering security and safety training programs that reflect best
practices and lessons learned from EA independent assessments to enhance workforce
performance.
The Office of Environment, Safety and Health Assessments conducts independent evaluations
that provide objective information and constructive feedback on programs for and performance
in protecting workers, the public and the environment from the nuclear and industrial hazards
associated with DOE's past and present operations, with a particular focus on nuclear facility
construction projects and high hazard nuclear operations.
The Office of Safeguards and Security Assessments conducts independent evaluations of the
effectiveness of safeguards and security policies and programs throughout the Department,
including those for protecting special nuclear material and classified and sensitive information,
and makes extensive use of large- and small-scale performance testing to realistically evaluate
site safeguards and security defense capabilities.
The Office of Cyber Assessments conducts independent evaluations of the effectiveness of
classified and unclassified cybersecurity policies and programs throughout the Department that
include performing detailed network penetration testing to detect vulnerabilities and risks that
could be exploited by sophisticated adversaries or malicious insiders. The Office also analyzes
cybersecurity trends and studies complex-wide issues to provide feedback on essential
information assurance practices to DOE Headquarters and sites.
66
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
20.3
Office of Legacy Management (LM)
The Office of Legacy Management (LM) was established to fulfill the Department's post-closure
responsibilities and to ensure the protection of human health and the environment. 83
LM's
responsibilities include long-term stewardship of 100 sites across the United States and Puerto
Rico. This includes a variety of programs related to the country's nuclear defense and energy
legacy, ranging from oversight of the administration and management of legacy contractor
benefits to assessing the condition of 2,500 defense-related uranium mines on federal public
land. 84
LM publishes a quarterly Program Update to provide a status of activities. The Program Update
documents and communicates the progress LM continues to make implementing the objectives
and strategies for each of the six goals in the LM Strategic Plan.85
The LM quarterly Program Updates86 highlight the key initiatives throughout the entire
organization including the specific contributions and accomplishments of individuals responsible
for LM's continued success. LM advances in each of the six goals are represented.
In addition, LM oversees the Department's Environmental Justice (EJ) program, as the agency
continues to be committed to EJ. DOE's EJ goals and objectives can be found in its latest EJ
Implementation Plan: 2019 Environmental Justice Second Five-Year Implementation Plan
(energy.gov).
20.3.1 Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA)
The Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) is the central adjudicative forum for the Department
of Energy. The Secretary of Energy has delegated to the OHA Director the authority to act in
many different areas. The OHA Director's decision typically serves as final agency action.
During it's over 30-year history, OHA has had broad-ranging subject matter jurisdiction.
Originally, OHA's primary function was to consider exceptions and other petitions related to the
economic oil regulations, as well as Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and Privacy Act
appeals, whistleblower matters, exceptions and special redress, and dispute resolutions. From
that point onward, OHA's jurisdiction has evolved to meet the needs of DOE's programs.
Over the years, OHA has heard appeals from a variety of DOE determinations, including those
related to the Department's Alternative Fuel Transportation Program, physician panel reviews of
DOE worker occupational illness claims, payment-equal-to-taxes claims under the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act of 1982, civil penalties imposed for violations of DOE's worker safety and
83
Office of Legacy Management Mission: https://www.energy.gov/lm/mission
84 Office of Legacy Management, Programs: https://www.energy.gov/lm/programs
85 Office of Legacy Management, LM Program Update,October-December, 2020:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/12/f82/2020 _Q4 ONLINE 0.pdf
86 Office of Legacy Management Program Updates: https://www.energy.gov/lm/listings/program-updates
67
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
health rule, and the equity interests in production from Elk Hills Oil Field, formerly Naval
Petroleum Reserve No. 1.
The procedures that OHA uses vary, depending on the type of case involved. OHA procedures
are flexible and easily adaptable to new situations, allowing OHA to minimize "start-up" times
and to produce high-quality work in new areas.
20.4 Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (IN)
The U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (IN) is
responsible for all intelligence and counterintelligence activities throughout the DOE complex,
including nearly thirty intelligence and counterintelligence offices nationwide.
IN protects vital national security information and technologies, representing intellectual
property of incalculable value. IN's contribution to national security is the ability to leverage the
Department's unmatched scientific and technological expertise in support of policymakers as
well as national security missions in defense, homeland security, cyber security, intelligence, and
energy security.
IN is a member of the U.S. Intelligence Community.
21.
Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs (IE)
The Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs (IE) is authorized to fund and implement a
variety of programmatic activities that assist American Indian Tribes and Alaska Native villages
with energy development, capacity building, energy cost reduction, and electrification of Indian
lands and homes. IE works with American Indian Tribes and Alaska Natives to maximize the
value of their energy resources through:
Facilitation of energy development
Education and training
Technical assistance
Funding
IE also leverages public-private partnerships, inter- and intra-governmental coordination, and
government-to-government partnerships to maximize the return on investments in the future of
Native American communities, 87 and annual Program Review meetings to provide an
opportunity for tribes and Alaska Native villages to share their successes and best practices.88
87 About Us, Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs: https://www.energy.gov/indianenergy/about-us
88
Office of Indian Energy Program Reviews: https://www.energy.gov/indianenergy/projects/program-reviev
68
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
21.1
Arctic Energy Office (AEO)
The Arctic Energy Office (AEO) leads cross-cutting operations in the Arctic with a mission to
tackle the energy, science, and national security challenges of the 21st Century. The office acts
as a nexus for DOE activities and represent the Department in engagements involving the Arctic.
AEO, with the Office of Technology Transitions (OTT), co-hosts ArcticX, an InnovationXLab
series exploring the Arctic's largely untapped potential to serve as a living laboratory of clean
energy innovation, and includes discussions on innovative solutions and furthering existing
energy projects. DOE's work in the Arctic is strengthened through partnerships with national
labs, federal agency partners, academia, tribal organizations, and industry partners.
69
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Appendix A. Evaluation, Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis Sources
Overall
SECTION 260-Performance and Strategic Reviews, OMB Circular No. A-11 (2020)
Page 7 of Section 260: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/s260.pdf
SECTION 270-Program and Project Management, OMB Circular No. A-11 (2020)
Page 2 of Section 270: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/s270.pdf
DOE G 120.1-5 Guidelines for Performance Measurement:
https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/100-series/0120.1-eguide-5
DOE/NNSA Site Facility Management Contracts:
 ttps://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/11/f68/DOE%2ONNSA%20Site%20Facilit
y%20Management%20Contracts%20-%20Nov%202019_ 0.pdf
Methodology for reporting: GAO-19-5 Management and Operating Contracts, p. 18:
https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697103.pdf
Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-58), 42 USC 15801, Section
2:
https://www.congress.gov/109/plaws/publ58/PLAW-109publ58.pdf
Department of Energy Acquisition Regulations, Part 970 - DOE Management and
Operating Contracts: https://www.acquisition.gov/dears/part-970-doe-management-and-
operating-contracts#P1270_216900
DOE O 413.3B Chg 6 (MinChg), Program and Project Management for the Acquisition
of Capital Assets: :https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/400-
eries/0413.3-border-b-chg6-minchg
DOE O 130.1A, Budget Planning, Formulation, Execution and Departmental
Performance Management: https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/100-
series/0130.1a-BOrder
National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA)
National Nuclear Security Administration: https://www.energy.gov/nnsa
NNSA Policy NAP 413.2, Program Management Policy:
https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy-documents/nap-0413-002/@@images/file
NNSA Policy NAP 540.3, Corporate Performance Evaluation Process for Management
and Operating Contractors: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy-documents/nap-
0540-003
BOP 413.6, Analysis of Alternatives: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/bop/bop-0413-006
BOP 413.9, Cost Analysis Requirements Description:
ittps://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/bop/bop-0413-009
NAP 130.1A, Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Evaluation (PPBE) Process:
https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy-documents/nap-0130-0001a
NAP 413.1, Data Collection for Cost Estimating: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-
policy-documents/nap-0413-001
A-1
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
NAP 413.3, Responsibilities for Cost Estimating: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-
policy-documents/nap-0413-003
NAP 540.3, Corporate Performance Evaluation Process for Management and Operating
Contractors: https://directives.nnsa.doe.gov/nnsa-policy-documents/nap-0540-003
Contracts, modifications, and performance evaluations for NNSA's sites:
ttps://www.energy.gov/nnsa/leadership-and-offices/acquisition-and-project-management
Naval Nuclear Laboratory Contract: https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/naval-nuclear-
laboratory-contract
Naval Nuclear Laboratory Contract, Paragraph 2.c, page 29:
ttps://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/09/f67/Contract 89233018CNR000004.pdi
Office of Science (SC)
Office of Science: https://www.energy.gov/science
Office of Science, Office of Project Management:
ttps://www.energy.gov/science/mission/project-assessment-opa
DOE O 413.2C Chgl (MinChg), Laboratory Directed Research and Development:
https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/0413.2-Border-c-chgl-minchg
Management & Operating (M&O) Contracts: https://science.osti.gov/lp/Management-
and-Operating-Contracts
Laboratory Appraisal Process, Office of Science web page:
https://science.osti.gov/lp/Laboratory-Appraisal-Process
Office of Science Lab Appraisal Process (includes 2019 Report Cards):
https://www.energy.gov/science/office-science-lab-appraisal-process
2006-2019 SC "Report Cards for each SC Lab): https://science.osti.gov/lp/Laboratory-
Appraisal-Process/Archives
Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy (EERE)
Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy (EERE): https://www.energy.gov/eere
EERE Program Evaluation: https://www.energy.gov/eere/analysis/eere-program-
evaluation
EERE Types of Evaluations: https://www.energy.gov/eere/analysis/types-evaluations
Overview of Evaluation Methods for R&D Programs:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2015/05/f22/evaluation_methods r andd.pdf
EERE Peer Review Guidance:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/02/f59/EERE%20810%20-
/20Peer%20Review%20Guidance.pdf
Evaluation, Measurement, and Verification of Energy Data:
 https://www.energy.gov/eere/slsc/evaluation-measurement-and-verification-energy-data
NREL Scorecards: https://www.energy.gov/eere/golden-reading-room-other-nrel-
documents
A-2
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Annual Performance Evaluation of the Alliance for Sustainable Energy at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, FY 15:
ttps://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/06/f32/GO-16-025%20Egger Part2.
DE-AC36-08G028308 Modification M1130:
https://www.nrel.gov/extranet/primecontract/assets/pdfs/m1130_section b.pdf
Annual Performance Evaluation of the Alliance for Sustainable Energy at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, FY 15, Part 2:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/06/f32/GO-16-025%20Egger_Part2.pdf
Annual Performance Evaluation of the Alliance for Sustainable Energy at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, FY 15, Part 1:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/06/f32/GO-16-025%20Egger Partl.pdf
NREL Scorecards: https://www.energy.gov/eere/golden-reading-room-other-nrel-
documents
DE-AC36-99G010337 Modification M110, Section 970.5237-2 (c) Facilities
Management:
https://www.nrel.gov/extranet/primecontract/assets/pdfs/reportingrequirements.pdi
DE-AC36-99G010337 Modification M110, Section 970.5232-3 (e) Furnish such
progress reports and schedules, financial Report, Accounts, Records, and cost reports,
and other reports concerning the work as the Contracting Officer may require.
https://www.nrel.gov/extranet/primecontract/assets/pdfs/reporting_requirements.pdf
Office of Electricity (OE)
Office of Electricity (OE): https://www.energy.gov/oe/office-electricity
Research, Development, and Deployment:
https://www.energy.gov/oe/activities/technology-development
Grid Modernization Initiative: :https://www.energy.gov/under-secretary-science-and-
energy/grid-modernization-initiative
Electricity policy: https://www.energy.gov/oe/electricity-policy-coordination-and-
implementation
Program evaluations/peer reviews: https://www.energy.gov/oe/information-
center/library/reviews
Advanced Grid Research and Development: https://www.energy.gov/oe/mission/oe-
divisions/advanced-grid-research-and-development
Smart Grid Research and Development:
https://www.energy.gov/oe/activities/technology-development/grid-modernization-
and-smart-grid
Microgrid Research and Development:
 https://www.energy.gov/oe/activities/technology-development/grid-modernization-
and-smart-grid/role-microgrids-helping
Energy Storage: https://www.energy.gov/oe/energy-storage
Electricity Delivery: :ttps://www.energy.gov/oe/electricity-delivery
Electricity Delivery Cybersecurity Research and Development:
ttps://www.energy.gov/oe/electricity-delivery-cybersecurity-research-and-
development-division
A-3
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER)
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER):
ps://www.energy.gov/ceser/office-cybersecurity-energy-security-and-emergency-
response
CESER's Cybersecurity Priorities: https://www.energy.gov/ceser/cesers-cybersecurity-
priorities
Multiyear Plan for Energy Sector Cybersecurity:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/05/f51/DOE Multiyear Plan for Energy
Sector Cybersecurity 0.pdf
CESER Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Activities: https://www.energy.gov/ceser/ceser-
electromagnetic-pulse-emp-activities
Cybersecurity for Energy Delivery Systems Research and Development:
tps://www.energy.gov/ceser/cybersecurity-energy-delivery-systems-research-and-
development
Cybersecurity Testing for Resilient Industrial Control Systems:
ittps://www.energy.gov/ceser/cybersecurity-testing-resilient-industrial-control-systems
Cybersecurity for the Operational Technology Environment (CyOTE):
 https://www.energy.gov/ceser/cybersecurity-operational-technology-environment-cyote
Department of Energy CyberForce Program: https://www.energy.gov/ceser/department-
energy-cyberforce-program-(
Clean Energy Cybersecurity Accelerator Program:
https://www.energy.gov/ceser/department-energy-clean-energy-accelerator-initiative
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM)
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM): https://www.energy.gov/fecm
Strategic Petroleum Reserve Annual Report for Calendar Year 2018, Report to Congress,
January 2020:
://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/01/f70/2018%20SPR%20Report%20t0%20
Congress.pdf
Contract DE-FE 0011020, M&O Contract for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve:
ttps://www.spr.doe.gov/reports/FFPOContract/Contract%20N0.%20DE-FE0011020.pdf
Contract DE-FE0011020, Modification 0021, Page 3, Paragraph B.2.(b) Total Available
Award Fee:
https://www.spr.doe.gov/reports/FFPOContract/21/Attachment%20t0%20Mod%200021
pdf
Contract DE-FE0011020, Modification 0049, Performance Evaluation and Measurement
Plan(s), Section I, Page I-19, paragraph I.109, (d):
ps://www.spr.doe.gov/reports/FFPOContract/49/Attachment%20t0%20Mod%200049.
pdf
GAO-19-5 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY - Performance Evaluations Could Better
Assess Management and Operating Contractor Costs, page 84.
https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697103.pdf
A-4
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Office of Nuclear Energy (NE)
Office of Nuclear Energy: https://www.energy.gov/ne
Idaho National Laboratory Contract, Section J, Attachment K. Fiscal Year 2019
Performance Evaluation and Measurement Plan, Modification 425 to Contract No. DE-
AC07-05ID14517:
https://www.id.energy.gov/doeid/INLContract/SEC%20J/Mod425SectionJAttachmentK
pdf
2019 INL Performance and Measurement Plan, Contract No. DE-AC07-05ID14517
 ttps://www.id.energy.gov/doeid/INLContract/SEC%20J/Mod425SectionJAttachmentK,
pdf
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E)
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E): https://arpa-e.energy.gov/
Public Law 110-69, America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote
Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science Act:
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-110publ69/pdf/PLAW-110publ69.pdf
Individual technology projects:
 https://arpa-e.energy.gov/technologies/projects
Programs: https://arpa-e.energy.gov/technologies/programs
Funding Opportunity Announcements (FOAs): https://arpa-
e.energy.gov/technologies/open-programs
Exploratory Topics: https://arpa-e.energy.gov/technologies/exploratory-topics
Seeding Critical Advances for Leading Energy technologies with Untapped Potential
(SCALEUP) program: https://arpa-e.energy.gov/technologies/scaleup
Technology-to-Market program: https://arpa-e.energy.gov/technologies/tech-to-market
Technology-to-Market milestones: https://arpa-
e.energy.gov/sites/default/files/documents/files/T2M_Milestones.pd
Annual Reports to Congress: https://arpa-e.energy.gov/about/annual-reports
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy Annual Report for FY 2019: https://arpa-
e.energy.gov/sites/default/files/ARPA-
%20FY19%20Annual%20Report%20t0%20Congress FINAL.pdf
Annual Energy Innovation Summit: https://www.arpae-summit.com/Summit-Info/About-
the-Summit
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA):
https://www.eia.gov/about/eia_offices.php
Petroleum & Other Liquids: https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/
This Week in Petroleum: https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/weekly/
Weekly Petroleum Status Report: https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/supply/weekly/
Natural Gas: https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/
A-5
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Weekly Natural Gas Storage Report: Weekly Natural Gas Storage Report
Natural Gas Weekly Update: https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/weekly
Electricity: https://www.eia.gov/electricity/
Electric Power Monthly: https://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly
Electricity Data Browser: https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/browser/
Consumption & Efficiency: https://www.eia.gov/consumption/
Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS):
https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/
Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS):
https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/
Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS):
https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/
Coal: https://www.eia.gov/coal/
Quarterly Coal Report: https://www.eia.gov/coal/production/quarterly/
Coal Data Browser: https://www.eia.gov/beta/coal/data/browser/
Renewable & Alternative Fuels: https://www.eia.gov/renewable/
Alternative Fuel Vehicle Browser: https://www.eia.gov/renewable/afv/
Nuclear & Uranium: https://www.eia.gov/nuclear/
Daily Status of Nuclear Outages: https://www.eia.gov/nuclear/outages/
Total Energy: https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/
Monthly Energy Review: https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly
Annual Energy Review: https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/
Analysis & Projects: https://www.eia.gov/analysis/
Short-Term Energy Outlook: https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo/
Annual Energy Outlook: https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/
International Energy Outlook: https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/
Markets & Finance: https://www.eia.gov/finance/
Market Prices and Uncertainty Report: https://www.eia.gov/finance/data.php
Energy & Financial Markets: What Drives Crude Oil Prices?:
https://www.eia.gov/finance/markets/crudeoil/
Environment: https://www.eia.gov/environment/
U.S. Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions:
https://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/carbon/
Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions at the State Level, through 2018: Energy-
Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions at the State Level, through 2018
Energy Disruptions: https://www.eia.gov/special/disruptions/
U.S. States: https://www.eia.gov/beta/states/
State Energy Data System (SEDS): https://www.eia.gov/state/seds/
Maps: https://www.eia.gov/maps/
U.S. Energy Atlas: https://atlas.eia.gov/
U.S. Energy Mapping System: https://www.eia.gov/state/maps.php
Gulf of Mexico: https://www.eia.gov/special/gulf of mexico/
International: https://www.eia.gov/beta/international/
A-6
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
International Energy Statistics: https://www.eia.gov/beta/international/data/browser/
Regional Dashboards & Data: https://www.eia.gov/regional/
New England Dashboard: ittps://www.eia.gov/dashboard/newengland/overview
Southern California Daily Energy Report: https://www.eia.gov/special/disruptions/socal/
Energy Disruptions: https://www.eia.gov/special/disruptions/
Office of Energy Analysis: https://www.eia.gov/about/eia offices.php
Application Programming Interface (API): https://www.eia.gov/opendata/qb.php
Loan Programs Office (LPO)
Loan Programs Office (LPO): https://www.energy.gov/lpo/loan-programs-office
Portfolio Management: https://www.energy.gov/lpo/portfolio/portfolio-management
Portfolio Projects: ttps://www.energy.gov/lpo/portfolio-projects
Portfolio Projects by Technology: https://www.energy.gov/lpo/portfolio/portfolio-
projects-technology
FY2020 Annual Portfolio Summary Report:
https://www.energy.gov/lpo/articles/fy2020-annual-portfolio-summary-report
Publications: https://www.energy.gov/lpo/publications
Title 17 Governing Documents: https://www.energy.gov/lpo/title-17-governing-
documents
DOE LPO Brochure 2020: https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2020/05/f74/DOE
LPO-Brochure-May2020.pdf
Office of Environmental Management (EM)
Office of Environmental Management (EM): https://www.energy.gov/em
Cleanup Sites: https://www.energy.gov/em/mission/cleanup-sites
EM Contractor Fee Determinations: https://www.energy.gov/em/em-contractor-fee-
determinations
Environmental Management's National Laboratory Governance Framework:
www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EM-National-Laboratory-
Governance-Framework.pdf
Memorandum, Office of Environmental Management, October 25, 2016, Subject:
Savannah River National Laboratory, "EM's National Laboratory":
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EM-National-Laboratory-
Governance-Framework.pdf
EM National Laboratory Governance Framework:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EM-National-Laboratory-
Governance-Framework.pdf
EM National Laboratory Network Charter:
://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/12/f58/EMNLN-Charter.pdf
A-7
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Office of the Inspector General (OIG): https://www.energy.gov/ig/office-inspector-
general
OIG Calendar Year Reports: https://www.energy.gov/ig/calendar-year-reports
Power Marketing Administrations (PMAs)
DOE O RA 6120.2, September 20, 1979: https://www.swpa.gov/pdfs/ra6120-2.pdf
GAO/AIMD-00-114 Power Marketing Administrations, page 10:
ttps://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ai00114.pdf
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA)
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA): https://www.bpa.gov/
BPA 2018-2023 Strategic Plan: https://www.bpa.gov/StrategicPlan/Pages/Strategic-
Plan.aspx
Bonneville 2020 Strategic Plan Progress Update:
https://www.bpa.gov/StrategicPlan/StrategicPlan/2020-Strategic-Update.pdf
Bonneville Power Administration, Financial Plan 2018:
https://www.bpa.gov/Finance/FinancialInformation/FinancialPlan/Documents/Financial-
Plan-2018.pdf
Bonneville Power Administration, Integrated Program Review, Initial Publication, June
2020: https://www.bpa.gov/Finance/FinancialPublicProcesses/IPR/2020IPR/20200612
3P-22-IPR-Initial-Detailed-Publication.pdf
Southeastern Power Administration (SEPA)
Southeastern Power Administration (SEPA): https://www.energy.gov/sepa
Southeastern Power Administration, Annual Reports:
ps://www.energy.gov/sepa/listings/annual-reports
Southeastern Power Administration, 2019 Annual Report:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/09/f79/2019 SEPA_ANNUAL_REPORT.
pdf
Southwestern Power Administration (SWPA)
Southwestern Power Administration (SWPA): https://www.energy.gov/swpa
Southwestern Power Administration Performance Plan - Goal Overview:
https://swpa.gov/PDFs/swpa-perf-plan-current.pdf
Southwestern Power Administration, 2018 Annual Report:
https://swpa.gov/PDFs/ARs/SWPA_FY2018_annual_report.pdf
Southwest Power Administration, Strategic Plan, October 2020:
https://swpa.gov/StrategicPlan.aspx
A-8
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Western Area Power Administration (WAPA)
Western Area Power Administration (WAPA): https://www.wapa.gov/
The Source: https://www.wapa.gov/About/the-source/Pages/the-source.aspr
Annual Reports:
https://www.wapa.gov/About/the-source/Pages/annual-reports.aspx
Western Area Power Administration, FY 2020 Annual Report:
https://www.wapa.gov/newsroom/Publications/Documents/FY-2020-annual-report.pdf
Tactical Action Plan (roadmap 24): https://www.wapa.gov/About/Documents/roadmap-
2024-refresh-tactical-action-plan.pdi
WAPA Reports 3rd Quarter Results:
https://www.wapa.gov/newsroom/NewsFeatures/2019/Pages/third-quarter-
performance.aspx
WAPA Reports 4th Quarter Results:
 ttps://www.wapa.gov/newsroom/NewsFeatures/2020/Pages/fourth-quarter-
performance.aspx
WAPA Financial Transparency: https://www.wapa.gov/About/the-
source/Pages/financial-transparency.aspx
Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs (CI)
Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs (CI):
s://www.energy.gov/congressional/office-congressional-and-intergovernmental-
affairs
Congressional Affairs: https://www.energy.gov/congressional/working-us/congressional-
affairs
Intergovernmental and External Affairshttps://www.energy.gov/congressional/working
us/intergovernmental-external-affairs
Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO): https://www.energy.gov/cfo/office-chief-
financial-officer
Agency Financial Report: https://www.energy.gov/cfo/listings/agency-financial-reports
Office of Finance and Accounting (CF-10): https://www.energy.gov/cfo/services/finance-
accounting
Office of Financial Policy and Audit Resolution (CF-20):
https://www.energy.gov/cfo/services/financial-policy-and-audit-resolution
Office of Budget (CF-30): https://www.energy.gov/cfo/services/budget-formulation-
execution
Agency Performance Report: :https://www.energy.gov/cfo/listings/annual-performance-
reports
Strategic Analysis: https://www.energy.gov/cfo/management-improvement-initiatives-
doe
A-9
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Office of Corporate Business Systems (CF-40):
  https://www.energy.gov/cfo/services/corporate-information-systems
Office of Economic Impact and Diversity (ED)
Diversity and inclusion goals: https://www.energy.gov/node/305461
Equal employment opportunities: https://www.energy.gov/diversity/eeo-complaint-
process
Minority educational institutions: https://www.energy.gov/diversity/minority-
educational-institutions-division
Equity in Energy: https://www.energy.gov/diversity/equity-energytm
Promoting Energy Justice: https://www.energy.gov/promoting-energy-justice
Energy Justice Dashboard (BETA): :https://www.energy.gov/diversity/energy-justice-
dashboard-beta
Office of International Affairs (IA)
Office of International Affairs: https://www.energy.gov/ia/office-international-affairs
IA Initiatives: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-initiatives
International Energy Commitments (IEC): https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-
energy-commitments-iec
Clean Energy Ministerial: https://www.energy.gov/ia/initiatives/clean-energy-ministerial
U.S.-Africa Cooperation: ittps://www.energy.gov/ia/downloads/us-africa-energy
cooperation
U.S.-Saudi Arabia Energy Cooperation: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-
initiatives/us-saudi-arabia-energy-cooperation
U.S.-UAE Energy Cooperation: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-
initiatives/us-uae-energy-dialogue
Natural Gas and LNG Options: https://www.energy.gov/ia/downloads/supporting-
 development-natural-gas-markets-and-lng-options
Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas:
  https://www.energy.gov/ia/initiatives/energy-and-climate-partnership-americas
International Energy Agency: https://www.energy.gov/ia/initiatives/international-energy
agency-iea
North American Energy Cooperation: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-
initiatives/north-american-energy-cooperation
U.S.-China Energy Collaboration: https://www.energy.gov/ia/initiatives/us-china-clean-
energy-research-center-cerc
U.S.-Israel: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-initiatives/us-israe
U.S.-India Energy Cooperation: https://www.energy.gov/ia/initiatives/us-india-energy-
cooperation
U.S.-EU Energy Council: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-initiatives/us-
eu-energy-council
G-7 Energy Ministers Meeting: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-
initiatives/g-7-energy-ministers-meeting
A-10
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
U.S.-Kazakhstan Energy Partnership: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-
 initiatives/us-kazakhstan-energy-partnership
U.S.-Ukraine Energy Cooperation: https://www.energy.gov/ia/international-affairs-
nitiatives/us-ukraine-energy-cooperation
The Partnership for Transatlantic Energy Cooperation:
https://www.energy.gov/ia/partnership-transatlantic-energy-and-climate-cooperation-p-
tecc
Artificial Intelligence and Technology Office (AITO)
Artificial Intelligence & Technology Office (AITO): https://www.energy.gov/artificial-
intelligence-technology-office
FY21/22 Program Plan and FY23 Forecast:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2021-11/AITO%20Program%20Plan%2011.
10-2021.pdf
Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO): https://www.energy.gov/cio/office-
chief-information-officer
U.S. Department of Energy Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
(FITARA) Common Baseline Implementation Plan and Self-Assessment | Department of
Energy: https://www.energy.gov/downloads/us-department-energy-federal-information-
technology-acquisition-reform-act-fitara-common
FY 2018-2022 Information Resource Management (IRM) Strategy | Department of
Energy: https://www.energy.gov/cio/articles/fy-2018-2022-information-resource-
management-irm-strategy
DOE Cybersecurity Strategy 2018-2020 | Department of Energy:
https://www.energy.gov/cio/downloads/doe-cybersecurity-strategy-2018-2020
Office of Management (MA)
Office of Management (MA): https://www.energy.gov/management/office-management
Aviation Management: https://www.energy.gov/management/office-
hanagement/operational-management/aviation-management
Executive Secretariat: https://www.energy.gov/management/office-
management/operational-management/executive-secretariat
Draft DOE directives online review, comment, and approval system (RevCom):
https://www.directives.doe.gov/revcom
Sustainability Performance: :ttps://www.energy.gov/management/spd/sustainability-
performance-division
Office of Asset Management: https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/02/f72/MA-
50 Organizational Chart - 2020 01 08 with Contact Info.jpg
U.S. Department of Energy Sustainability Reporting | Department of Energy:
https://www.energy.gov/management/spd/us-department-energy-sustainability-reporting
A-11
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Sustainability Dashboard: Home (doe.gov):
tps://sustainabilitydashboard.doe.gov/Home.aspx?ReturnUrl=%2f
2020 DOE Sustainability Report and Implementation Plan:
https://www.sustainability.gov/pdfs/doe-2020-sustainability-plan.pdf
Office of the Federal Chief Sustainability Officer | Federal Agency Progress Data and
Scorecards: https://www.sustainability.gov/doe.html
DOE Vulnerability Assessment and Resilience Planning (VARP) Guidance 2021x.docx
(live.com):
https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.energy.gov
%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2F2021-
09%2FDOE%2520VARP%2520Guidance%25202021x.docx&wdOrigin=BROWSELIN
K
Department of Energy FY 2020 OMB Scorecard (sustainability.gov)
https://www.sustainability.gov/pdfs/doe-scorecard-fy2020.pdf
DOE's Historic OMB Scorecards | Department of Energy:
https://www.energy.gov/management/spd/articles/does-historic-omb-scorecards
Energy Reduction at HQ: https://www.energy.gov/management/office-
hanagement/operational-management/energy-reduction-hq
Policy: https://www.energy.gov/management/downloads/hq-ems-policy
Real Estate: https://www.energy.gov/management/office-management/operational-
gement/real-estate/documents-and-publications
DOE Asset Management Plan Department of Energy:
https://www.energy.gov/management/downloads/doe-asset-management-plan
Excess Property Available for Economic Redevelopment | Department of Energy:
https://www.energy.gov/management/downloads/excess-property-available-economic-
redevelopment
DOE Order 430.1C, Real Property Asset Management:
 https://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/400-series/0430.1-BOrder-c-chg2-
adminchg
Facilities Information Management System (FIMS): https://fims.doe.gov/fimsinfo/
Condition Assessment Information System (CAIS): https://fims.doe.gov/caisinfo/
Federal Real Property Profile: https://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/102880
Facilities and Infrastructure: https://www.energy.gov/management/office-
  management/operational-management/facilities-and-infrastructure
Federal Advisory Committee Management: https://www.energy.gov/management/office
management/operational-management/federal-advisory-committee-management
Advanced Scientific Computing Advisory Committee (ASCAC):
https://science.energy.gov/ascr/ascac/
Appliance Standard and Rulemaking Federal Advisory Committee (ASRAC):
https://www.energy.gov/eere/buildings/appliance-standards-and-rulemaking-federal-
advisory-committee
Basic Energy Sciences Advisory Committee (BESAC):
https://science.energy.gov/bes/besac
Biological and Environmental Research Advisory Committee (BERAC):
A-12
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
https://science.energy.gov/ber/berac/
Biomass Research and Development Technical Advisory Committee:
https://biomassboard.gov/committee/meetings.html
Defense Programs Federal Advisory Committee (DPAC):
https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/defense-programs-advisory-committee-0
DOE/NSF Nuclear Science Advisory Committee (NSAC):
https://science.energy.gov/np/nsac/
Electricity Advisory Committee (EAC): https://www.energy.gov/oe/services/electricity-
advisory-committee-eac
Environmental Management Advisory Board (EMAB):
https://www.energy.gov/em/services/communication-engagement/environmental-
management-advisory-board-emab
Environmental Management Site-Specific Advisory Boards (EM SSAB):
ttps://www.energy.gov/em/services/communication-engagement/em-site-specific-
advisory-board-em-ssab
Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory Committee (FESAC):
https://science.energy.gov/fes/fesac/
High Energy Physics Advisory Panel (HEPAP): https://science.energy.gov/hep/hepap/
Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technical Advisory Committee (HTAC):
https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/advisory htac.html
Methane Hydrate Advisory Committee (MHAC):
tps://www.energy.gov/fe/services/advisory-committees/methane-hydrate-advisory-
committee
National Coal Council (NCC): http://www.nationalcoalcouncil.org/
National Petroleum Council (NPC) https://www.npc.org/
Nuclear Energy Advisory Committee (NEAC):
https://www.energy.gov/management/office-management/operational-
management/nuclear-energy-advisory-committee
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST):
https://www.nitrd.gov/pcast/Index.aspx
Secretary of Energy Advisory Board (SEAB): https://www.energy.gov/eere/steab/state-
energy-advisory-board
State Energy Advisory Board (STEAB): https://www.energy.gov/eere/steab/state-energy-
advisory-board
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA): https://www.energy.gov/management/freedom-
information-act
FOIA Annual Reports | Department of Energy:
https://www.energy.gov/management/foia-annual-reports
Personal Property: https://www.energy.gov/management/office-management/operational-
management/procurement-and-acquisition/personal-property
Acquisition and Financial Assistance: https://www.energy.gov/management/department-
energy-guidance-acquisition-financial-assistance
Balanced Scorecard performance measures, targets, and program description:
tps://www.energy.gov/management/downloads/balanced-scorecard-program
A-13
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Benefit Value Study Desk Manual:
https://www.energy.gov/management/downloads/value-study-desk-manual
Cost Study Manual: https://www.energy.gov/management/downloads/cost-study-manual
PERT Review for Contractors' Purchasing Systems:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2020/06/f76/09192018 FY2018
Finalized
PERT Charter -Fully Signed-All BR F-V1.pdf
Certifications and Professional Development:
https://www.energy.gov/management/office-management/operational-
  management/certifications-and-professional-development
Acquisition ANSWERS - Dept of Energy - MAX Federal Community:
https://community.max.gov/display/DOE/Acquisition+ANSWERS
Office of Project Management (PM)
Office of Project Management (PM): https://www.energy.gov/management/office
management
Project Dashboard report:
 https://www.energy.gov/projectmanagement/articles/december-2021-project-dashboard
Root Cause Analysis Report (RCA) 2008:
ttps://www.energy.gov/projectmanagement/downloads/root-cause-analysis-contract-
and-project-management
Corrective Action Plan (CAP) 2008:
 ttps://www.energy.gov/projectmanagement/downloads/corrective-action-plan-cap-2008
RCA/CAP Closure Report of 2011:
ttps://www.energy.gov/projectmanagement/downloads/root-cause-analysis-and-
corrective-action-plan-closure-report
Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO)
Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO): https://www.energy.gov/hc/office-
chief-human-capital-officer
Strategic Human Capital Plan: https://www.energy.gov/hc/downloads/doe-strategic-
human-capital-plan
Office of Human Capital Assessments and Compliance (HC-1.2)
 https://www.energy.gov/hc/office-human-capital-assessments-and-compliance-hc-12
Office of Employee and Labor Relations, Policy, and Oversight (HC-1.3):
tps://www.energy.gov/hc/office-employee-and-labor-relations-policy-and-oversight-hc-
13
Oak Ridge HR Shared Service Center: ttps://www.energy.gov/hc/oak-ridge-hr-shared-
service-center
Bonneville Power Administration HR Service Center: https://www.energy.gov/hc/bonneville-
power-administration-hr-service-center
Power Marketing Administration HR Service Center: https://www.energy.gov/hc/power-
marketing-administration-hr-shared-service-cente
Office of Corporate Services (HC-10): https://www.energy.gov/hc/office-corporate-
services-hc-10
A-14
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Office of Talent Management (HC-20): https://www.energy.gov/hc/office-talent-
management-hc-20
Office of Corporate Executive Management (HC-40): https://www.energy.gov/hc/about-
s/human-capital-organization/office-executive-resources-hc-40
Office of Small & Disadvantaged Business Utilization (SDBU)
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU):
  https://www.energy.gov/osdbu/office-small-and-disadvantaged-business-utilization
OSDBU's History: https://www.energy.gov/osdbu/our-history
OSDBU Strategic Objectives: ttps://www.energy.gov/osdbu/our-mission
SBA Scorecards: ttps://www.energy.gov/osdbu/sba-scorecards
DOE FY 2020 Small Business Procurement Scorecard:
ttps://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/2021-07/DOE-508 0.pdf
SBDU Annual Reports: https://www.energy.gov/osdbu/newsroom/annual-reports
Office of General Counsel (GC)
Office of General Counsel (GC): https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-general-counse
GC services: https://www.energy.gov/gc/services
Deputy General Counsel for Administration: https://www.energy.gov/gc/administration
Assistant General Counsel for Ethics and Personnel Law:
ttps://www.energy.gov/gc/office-assistant-general-counsel-ethics-and-personnel-law
Associate General Counsel for Fiscal and Information Law:
https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-associate-general-counsel-finance-and-information-law
Deputy General Counsel for Litigation, Regulation and Enforcement:
tps://www.energy.gov/gc/services/litigation-and-enforcement-resources
Litigation: https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-assistant-general-counsel-litigation-0
Enforcement: https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-assistant-general-counsel-enforcement
Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency: https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-
sistant-general-counsel-legislation-regulation-and-energy-efficienc
Deputy General Counsel for Environment and Compliance:
https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/environment-and-compliance
Environment: https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/environment-and-nuclear-
 programs/office-assistant-general-counsel-environment
International and National Security Programs:
 ttps://www.energy.gov/gc/services/environment-and-nuclear-programs/office-assistant-
general-counsel-international-and
NEPA Policy and Compliance: :https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/environment-and-
nuclear-programs/office-nepa-policy-and-compliance
Deputy General Counsel for Transactions, Technology, & Contractor Human Resources:
tps://www.energy.gov/gc/services/transactions-technology-and-contractor-human-
relations
Procurement and Financial Assistance: https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/technology-
ransfer-and-procurement/office-assistant-general-counsel-procurement-and
A-15
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property: https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-
assistant-general-counsel-technology-transfer-and-intellectual-property
Contractor Human Resources: https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-assistant-general-
counsel-contractor-human-resources
Deputy General Counsel for Energy Policy: https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/energy-
policy
Civilian Nuclear Programs: https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/environment-and-
nuclear-programs/office-assistant-general-counsel-civilian-nuclear
Standard Contract Management: https://www.energy.gov/gc/services/environment-and-
nuclear-programs/office-standard-contract-management
Electricity and Fossil Energy: https://www.energy.gov/gc/office-assistant-general-
counsel-electricity-and-fossil-energy
Operations Offices and Field Offices: https://www.energy.gov/gc/contacts-field-counsel-
offices
Relevant Laws: /gc/legal-resources/laws-doe-administers
GC Guidance and Opinions: /gc/guidance-opinions
Ex Parte Communications: /gc/ex-parte-communications
Enforcement:  gc/services/litigation-and-enforcement-resources/office-assistant-general-
counsel-enforcement
Ethics and Personnel Law:/gc/office-assistant-general-counsel-ethics-and-personnel-law
Finance and Information Law: /gc/office-associate-general-counsel-finance-and-
information-law
Labor Compliance Advisor:/gc/labor-compliance-advisor
Legislation and Regulation:/gc/services/energy-policy/office-assistant-general-counsel-
legislation-regulation-and-energy
Litigation:/gc/services/litigation-and-enforcement-resources/office-assistant-general-
counsel-litigation
NEPA:/nepa/office-nepa-policy-and-compliance
Procurement and Financial Assistance: /gc/services/technology-transfer-and
 procurement/office-assistant-general-counsel-procurement-and
Retrospective Review:/gc/services/open-government/restrospective-regulatory-review
Rulemaking and Public Proceedings:/gc/services/open-government/public-participation-
doe-proceedings
SmartGrid :gc/services/smartgrid-information
Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property:/gc/services/technology-transfer-and
procurement/office-assistant-general-counsel-technology-transfer
External Legal Resources:/gc/online-legal-resources
Office of Policy (OP)
Office of Policy (OP): https://www.energy.gov/policy/office-policy
Office of Technology Policy: https://www.energy.gov/policy/technology-policy
Energy Earthshots Initiative: https://www.energy.gov/policy/energy-earthshots-initiative
FACT SHEET: President Biden Renews U.S. Leadership on World Stage at U.N.
A-16
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Climate Conference (COP26): https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/11/01/fact-sheet-president-biden-renews-u-s-leadership-on-world-stage-at-
u-n-climate-conference-cop26/
The Long-Term Strategy of the United States: Pathways to 2050 Net-Zero Greenhouse
Gas Emissions: ittps://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/US-Long-
Term-Strategy.pdf
Office of Deployment and Infrastructure Policy:
https://www.energy.gov/policy/deployment-and-infrastructure-policy
Supply Chains: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-
supply-chain-review-
report.pdf?utm source=sfmc%E2%80%8B&utm medium=email%E2%80%8B&utm ca
mpaign=20210610_GlobalManufacturing_Economic_Update June_Members
Supply Chain Executive Order: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential
ctions/2021/02/24/executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains/
100-Day Report on High-Capacity Electric Vehicle Batteries:
tps://www.energy.gov/articles/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-100-day-battery-
supply-chain-review
DOE Announces Actions to Bolster Domestic Supply Chain of Advanced Batteries:
https://www.energy.gov/articles/doe-announces-actions-bolster-domestic-supply-chain-
advanced-batteries
Clean Energy Reliability: https://www.energy.gov/articles/reliable-affordable-clean-
oower-sector-here-its-time-invest-future
Office of State, Local, and Tribal Policy: https://www.energy.gov/policy/state-local-and-
tribal-policy
Communities LEAP: https://www.energy.gov/communitiesLEAP/communities-leap
Justice40: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/01/27/fact-sheet-president-biden-takes-executive-actions-to-tackle-the-
climate-crisis-at-home-and-abroad-create-jobs-and-restore-scientific-integrity-across-
federal-government/
Office of Energy Jobs: https://www.energy.gov/policy/energy-jobs
Creating Clean Energy Union Jobs: https://www.energy.gov/creating-clean-energy-
union-jobs
U.S. Energy and Employment Report: https://www.energy.gov/us-energy-employment-
jobs-report-useer
Office of Public Affairs (PA)
Office of Public Affairs (PA): https://www.energy.gov/newsroom
Office of Technology Transitions (OTT)
Office of Technology Transitions (OTT):
 ttps://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/office-technology-transitions
Technology Commercialization Fund (TCF):
ttps://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/services/technology-commercialization-
A-17
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
fund
Lab Partnering Service: http://labpartnering.org/
Facility descriptions: https://www.labpartnering.org/search?typ%5b%5d=facility
Technical summaries: https://www.labpartnering.org/search?typ%5b%5d=techsummar
Visual Patent Search: https://vps.labworks.org/
Bayh-Dole Act of 1980: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-
94/pdf/STATUTE-94-Pg3015.pdf
Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980:
https://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/480.pdf
Energy Policy Act of 2005: :https://www.congress.gov/bill/109th-congress/house-bill/6
Technology Transitions Execution Plan:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/10/f33/TTEP Final.pdf
Report on Technology Transfer and Related Technology Partnering Activities at the
National Laboratories and Other Facilities:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/10/f56/Annual DOE TT Report
FY2015_0.pdf
Technology Transfer Working Group:
https://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/technology-transfer-working-group-ttwg
Solutions Exchange: https://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/solutions-exchange
InnovationXLab: ttps://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/innovationxlab
Spotlights: ttps://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/spotlights
Market Analysis: https://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/market-analysis
Market Analysis reports, technology roadmaps, and other analyses:
https://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/articles/ott-market-analyses-and-roadmaps
STEM Tools: https://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/articles/ott-stem-resources
OTT University Resources Toolkit 2020-2021:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2021-07/OTT University Resources Toolkit
2020-2021.pdf
DOE Laboratory Partnership Opportunities for Colleges and Universities:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2020/08/f77/DOE Laboratory Partnership
Opportunities for Colleges and Universities 4.p
Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security (AU)
Daily Occurrence Reports: https://www.energy.gov/ehss/daily-occurrence-reports
Office of Environment, Health, Safety, and Security (AU):
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/environment-health-safety-security
Comprehensive Epidemiologic Data Resource (CEDR) System:
https://orise.orau.gov/worker-health/data-center/comprehensive-epidemiologic-data-
resource.html
Computerized Accident/Incident Reporting System (CAIRS):
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/corporate-reporting-analysis/databases/computerized-
ccident-incident-reporting-system
DOE OPEXShare Lessons Learned database: https://doeopexshare.doe.gov/
A-18
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Fire Protection: :ttps://www.energy.gov/ehss/corporate-reporting-analysis/databases/fire-
protection-database
DOE O-231.1B, Environment, Safety, And Health Reporting:
ttps://www.directives.doe.gov/directives-documents/200-series/0231.1-BOrder-b-
admchgl
Occurrence Reporting and Processing System (ORPS):
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/corporate-reporting-analysis/databases/occurrence-
reporting-and-processing-system
Radiation Exposure Monitoring System (REMS)
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/occupational-radiation-exposure
Radiological Source Registry and Tracking (RSRT)
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/corporate-reporting-analysis/databases/occupational-
radiation-exposure/radiological-source
Reporting for Radiological Sealed Sources Transactions:
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/downloads/memorandum-reporting-radiological-sealed-
sources-transactions
Safety Basis Information System (SBIS): https://www.energy.gov/ehss/safety-basis-
information-system
Suspect/Counterfeit and Defective Items:
https://www.energy.gov/ehss/suspectcounterfeit-and-defective-items
Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA)
Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA): https://www.energy.gov/ea/office-enterprise-
assessments
Office of Environment, Safety and Health Assessments:
 ttps://www.energy.gov/ea/environment-safety-and-health-assessments
Office of Safeguards and Security  Assessmentshttps://www.energy.gov/ea/safeguards-
and-security-assessments
Office of Cyber Assessments: https://www.energy.gov/ea/cyber-assessments
Office of Legacy Management (LM)
Office of Legacy Management (LM): https://www.energy.gov/lm
Office of Legacy Management, Programs: https://www.energy.gov/lm/programs
Office of Legacy Management Program Updates:
https://www.energy.gov/lm/listings/program-updates
Office of Legacy Management, FY 2021 - FY 2025 High performing Organization Plan,
DOE/LM-1489, September 2020:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/10/f79/DOE%20LM%20FY%202021-
2025%20HPO%20Plan%20FINAL.pdf
Environmental Management Systems Programs Manual:
https://www.lm.doe.gov/Office_ of Site Operations/
2019 Environmental Justice Second Five-Year Implementation Plan:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2019/05/f62/2019FiveYearImplementationPla
A-19
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
n ONLINE.pdf
Office of Hearing and Appeals (OHA)
Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA): ttps://www.energy.gov/oha/office-hearings-
and-appeals
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA): ttps://www.energy.gov/oha/foia-privacy-act-
appeal-information
Privacy Act: https://www.energy.gov/oha/office-hearings-and-appeals
Whistleblower Matters: https://www.energy.gov/oha/whistleblower-hearings-and-appeals
Exceptions and Special Redress: :https://www.energy.gov/oha/exceptions-and-special-
redress
Dispute Resolutions: https://www.energy.gov/oha/adr-office
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence(
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (IN):
https://www.energy.gov/intelligence/office-intelligence-and-counterintelligence
U.S. Intelligence Community: https://www.intelligencecareers.gov/
Office of the Director of National Intelligence: http://www.dni.gov/index.php
National Counterproliferation Center:
ittp://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/national-counterproliferation-center-
who-we-are
National Counterterrorism Center: http://www.nctc.gov/
National Counterintelligence and Security Center: https://www.dni.gov/index.php/ncsc-
home
Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs (IE)
Program Reviews: https://www.energy.gov/indianenergy/projects/program-review
Arctic Energy Office (AEO)
Arctic Energy Office (AEO): https://www.energy.gov/arctic/arctic-energy-office
Arctic Engagements: https://www.energy.gov/arctic/arctic-related-publications
ArcticX: https://www.energy.gov/technologytransitions/arcticx
Innovative Solutions: https://www.energy.gov/eere/water/articles/north-future-wpto-
helps-alaskan-partners-pursue-clean-energy-future-water-power
Existing energy projects: https://www.energy.gov/articles/arctic-innovation-abounds-
department-energy-projects
A-20
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Appendix B. DOE Learning Agenda
The mission of the Energy Department is to ensure America's security and prosperity by
addressing its energy, environmental and nuclear challenges through transformative science and
technology solutions. 89 By law, the Department of Energy (DOE) is responsible for formulating
and implementing a coordinated national energy policy to address energy production and use;
advancing the energy and nuclear security of the United States; conducting scientific research
and technological innovation in support of that mission; conducting basic research in the
physical sciences; and advancing national nuclear waste management, including environmental
cleanup.
The Department of Energy (DOE) recognizes the importance of evidence and evaluation to
understand and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs and operations in
pursuit of the Department's mission. To support evaluation planning, the DOE has established an
Annual Evaluation Plan (AEP) in alignment with the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act. 90 The AEP identifies the research and evaluation questions the Agency plans
to complete through the next fiscal year.
Program evaluations are conducted through consultations with DOE program leadership, review,
and development by internal program evaluators. The evaluations are designed to meet DOE
priorities, answer research questions in the Enterprise Learning Agenda, and build a suite of
evidence to inform decision-making. Evaluations highlighted in this AEP reflect the most
significant planned evaluations for FY 2023 in alignment with the DOE's mission as reflected in
the Agency's FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan, expected usefulness to support program
improvement, and greatest impact on small businesses and other Agency stakeholders.
The energy, science, nuclear security, nuclear waste management, and cybersecurity goals in this
evaluation plan are aligned with the DOE mission and goals from the strategic plan.
Energy - DOE is the lead agency for developing plans and programs to implement a coordinated
national energy policy through analysis and cooperation with Federal, state, and local
governments. DOE leads the Nation in cutting-edge research and development of an extensive
range of technologies in support of an energy dominance strategy. DOE identifies, funds, and
promotes technological advances to increase energy affordability, performance, and efficiency.
DOE also leads national efforts to further research and develop technologies to modernize the
electric grid and improve its reliability and resilience; enhance the security, reliability, and
resilience of energy infrastructure; improve domestic fossil energy production and use; and
expedite recovery from energy supply disruptions.
Science - DOE is the largest Federal sponsor of basic research in the physical sciences. DOE's
world-leading research in the physical, chemical, biological, and computational sciences
advances fundamental scientific discoveries and technological solutions that support American
89 https://www.energy.gov/mission
90
www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/4174
B-1
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
pre-eminence in science and innovation. DOE also leads the national effort to maintain its global
primacy in high-performance computing.
Nuclear Security - DOE enhances the security and safety of the Nation through its national
security endeavors: maintaining a safe, secure, and effective nuclear weapons stockpile that will
deter any adversary and guarantee the defense of the Nation and its allies; managing the research,
development, and production activities and associated infrastructure needed to meet national
nuclear security requirements; accelerating and expanding efforts to reduce the global threat
posed by nuclear weapons, nuclear proliferation, and unsecured or excess nuclear and
radiological materials; providing advance capabilities to respond to nuclear or radiological
incidents and accidents worldwide; and providing safe and effective nuclear propulsion for the
U.S. Navy.
Nuclear Waste Management - DOE leads the effort to address the Federal Government's
nuclear waste management responsibility; continue the largest cleanup effort in the world to
remediate the environmental legacy of six decades of nuclear weapons development; and
produce and sponsor nuclear energy research.
Cybersecurity - DOE supports the Government's effort to assist energy infrastructure owners
with cybersecurity and to ensure cyber/physical attacks do not have a catastrophic impact on the
energy sector. DOE also ensures the cybersecurity and resilience of the DOE enterprise
infrastructure.
DOE Enterprise Management and Oversight - As DOE carries out its mission through
execution of its strategic goals, it will develop, manage, and support a talented and engaged
workforce, provide a modern, secure physical and information technology infrastructure, and
strengthen effective and cost-efficient management initiatives.
Achieving these goals requires sustained commitment to performance-based management.
Program evaluations are tailored to the specific mission set and include a broad range of
evaluation types. To ensure actionable results, the DOE's evaluations follow the principles of
ethics, independence, rigor, relevance, and transparency reflected in OMB Circular A-11,
Section 29091 and OMB Memoranda M-19-2392. , M-20-1293 , and M-21-2794
.
91 s290.pdf (whitehouse.gov)
92 MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES M-19-23
(whitehouse.gov)
93
www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/M-20-12.pdi
94 M-21-27 (whitehouse.gov)
B-2
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
1.
Optimize Carry-Over Balances for DOE Program and Support Functions
Lead DOE Program/Support Office: Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
Description: Most DOE programs and functions obligate appropriated budget authority in the
current fiscal year and "carry-over" unused funds to the next fiscal year due to a variety of
factors. There are circumstances that justify carrying over unused funds including maintaining
reserves to manage risk and phased execution of long-term capital projects. At present, there is
no Department-wide analysis to provide best practices to manage carry-over balances.
An evaluation will be conducted to determine appropriate tools and methods for managing carry-
over balances, and whether certain best practices should be adopted on an agency-wide basis for
program and functional activities.
Enterprise Learning Agenda (ELA). This evaluation supports the DOE's understanding of the
following ELA question:
What factors most influence the Department's ability to obligate appropriated budget
authority in the current fiscal year and "carry-over" unused funds to the next fiscal
year?
Evaluation Questions. The DOE seeks the answer the following evaluation questions and their
sub-components in this study:
How does the government review process serve as a tool to help agencies meet their
goals obligated appropriated budget authority in the current fiscal year?
How does the government review process serve as a tool to help agencies "carry-
over" unused funds to the next fiscal year as appropriate?
What are the appropriate tools and methods for managing carry-over balances?
What best practices should be adopted on an agency-wide basis for program and
functional activities?
What aspects of these tools and methods lead to improved outcomes?
What aspects of these processes could be made more effective or efficient?
Activities: The OCFO will conduct an evaluation that reviews appropriations and carry-over
balances for select DOE program and function offices for the past 5 fiscal years. The study will:
analyze appropriations and carry-over balances to determine if trends and outliers exist
determine the nature of work conducted by program or support office and consider how
this should affect carry over balances
interview program managers for insight into how they manage carry-over balances
review carry-over data for non-DOE programs and determine whether relevant
comparisons to DOE can be made
determine if best practices can be recommended to DOE programs and support functions
for managing carry-over balances
determine if corrective action for managing any DOE carry-over balances is advisable
B-3
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Timeline: OCFO anticipates this study will take 6-9 months. Instituting recommendations
produced by the study will take an additional 12-24 months.
Data: Data gathered for this evaluation may include:
5-years of appropriations and carry-over balances for select DOE programs & functions
appropriations and carry-over balances of non-DOE programs
interviews of DOE program and function managers
interviews of non-DOE program and function managers
Evidence Use and Dissemination: DOE program staff would receive recommendations on
activities that lead to greater goal achievement, as well as activities that could be adapted to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of surveillance reviews. Results will be presented to
DOE program managers and senior leadership, published on the DOE website, and shared in the
DOE's Evidence and Evaluation Community of Practice.
Progress and Accomplishments:_While a formal study has not yet been conducted to analyze
and provide recommendations for optimization, CF-32 generates (and provides to programs)
status updates pertaining to Time Limited Funds (TLF) and to remind programs of funding that
will "expire" (unobligated) and "cancel" (uncosted) before the end of the fiscal year. This
information is also accessible from the QTR Budget Execution Review dashboard, Daily Time
Limited.
2.
Statistical Methodology Improvement Plan (SMIP)
Lead DOE Program/Support Office: U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)
Description: As one of the 13 principal federal statistical agencies, EIA collects, analyzes, and
disseminates large amounts of data to inform citizens, businesses, and lawmakers about energy
production, transformation, and consumption. To perform this service, EIA adheres to both
established professional statistical practices and complies with the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) statistical standards and oversight. EIA must receive approval from OMB every
three years to conduct a particular survey. To receive this approval, EIA must show that it is
actively monitoring, evaluating, and meeting data quality standards. To meet these requirements,
EIA has developed a Statistical Methodology Improvement Plan (SMIP) that evaluates and
improves the data quality of EIA surveys and products.
Impact: The SMIP's explicit goal is to improve EIA's statistical methodologies and data quality.
To this end, the SMIP provides a structured five-year program that covers the processes to
evaluate and improve surveys and products, an in-depth list of statistical methodologies with
which to improve surveys and products, and the statistical roles and training that will improve
current staff statistical capabilities and further the use of newer data science techniques.
Enterprise Learning Agenda. This evaluation supports the DOE's understanding of the
following ELA question:
B-4
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
What factors most influence the Department's ability to improve EIA's statistical
methodologies and data quality?
Evaluation Questions. The DOE seeks the answer the following evaluation questions and their
sub-components in this study:
How does EIA's statistical methodologies serve to help EIA meet its goals to collect,
analyze, and disseminate large amounts of data?
How do EIA processes ensure its ability to actively monitor, evaluate, and meet data
quality standards?
How well does the SMIP support improvement EIA's statistical methodologies and
data quality?
What best practices should be adopted from the SMIP on an agency-wide basis for
program and functional activities?
What aspects of these tools and methods lead to improved outcomes?
What aspects of these processes could be made more effective or efficient?
Data and Evaluation Method: The following describes the three SMIP plan processes for
evaluating data products.
Evaluation Process. A process that evaluates the statistical methodologies used to
conduct, process, and publish a data product. This process outlines possible
methodological improvements or alternative approaches for surveys and products.
The process also provides data validation and quality monitoring.
Targeted Methodology Improvement Process. A process that implements
improvements that are most readily identifiable and achievable for the statistical
methodologies used to conduct, process, and publish a data product.
Full Methodology Improvement Process. A process that completely reviews and
updates, as necessary, all statistical methodologies currently used to conduct, process,
and publish a data product.
Evidence Use and Dissemination: The initial term of the SMIP, used to implement and achieve
the SMIP's goal of improving EIA's statistical methodologies and data quality, is for five years,
after which time EIA will review and update it as needed to respond to lessons learned in its
implementation. DOE program staff would receive recommendations on activities that lead to
greater goal achievement, as well as activities that could be adapted to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of surveillance reviews. Results will be presented to DOE program managers and
senior leadership, published on the DOE website, and shared in the DOE's Evidence and
Evaluation Community of Practice.
Progress and Accomplishments:
B-5
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Question/Topic
Progress/Accomplishments
What factors most
As a federal statistical agency, EIA must adhere to generally
influence the
accepted statistical practices as developed in academia and in
Department's ability
professional practice. As adopted, these practices inherently have
to improve EIA's
requirements and standards to which EIA must adhere. These
statistical
requirements and standards are further influenced by constraints of
methodologies and
costs, personnel, and oversight regulations. Based on these
data quality?
combined conditions, the following points generally summarize the
biggest influences on EIA 's ability to engage in statistical
methodology and data quality improvement projects:
Statistical limitations of data/availability of data:
Improved methodologies are not always suited for
existing collected data.
Improved methodologies frequently rely on new
and/or expanded data collection.
Not all data are readily available to be collected.
Mission/operational conditions:
EIA must produce data products in a timely manner,
which does not easily allow for changes in production.
EIA staff primarily support existing products and not
expanding products.
Personnel availability:
Limited personnel limits time available to research
and implement new methodologies.
EIA needs new/improved skill sets to develop and
implement new methodologies.
Budgets (Cost to run surveys & products/Cost to change
surveys & products):
Funds may not be available to run new/expanded
surveys.
Changes in surveys and products can incur costs for
changes in production systems, retraining staff,
educating stakeholders, etc.
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Survey Clearance
review requirements and standards:
OMB must review and approve changes for survey
methodologies.
Methodologies must comply with OMB standards.
How do EIA's
EIA must follow generally accepted statistical practices. Statistical
statistical
practices consist of the development and implementation of specific
methodologies serve
statistical methodologies. The following points summarize the
to help EIA meet its
purpose of statistical methodologies with respect to EIA data:
goals to collect,
analyze, and
B-6
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Question/Topic
Progress/Accomplishments
disseminate large
Statistical methodologies make up the overall process on how
amounts of data?
data are collected, analyzed, and disseminated.
Statistical methodologies inherently require repeatability with
contingencies to address issues and errors that affect
production.
Statistical methodologies establish specific standards to
ensure minimum data quality thresholds are met.
Statistical methodologies can be applied to quantify the
precision of data and the level of variability in them.
Statistical methodologies can be readily documented and
disseminated for transparency and understanding by
stakeholders.
How do EIA processes
The following points summarize EIA 's process in monitoring,
ensure its ability to
evaluating, meeting data quality standards:
actively monitor,
evaluate, and meet
As part of its OMB Survey Clearance approvals, EIA must
data quality standards?
establish minimum statistical data quality standards with
which it must comply.
EIA actively tracks survey and product data quality as part
of the production process to ensure data quality standards
are met.
EIA applies certain statistical methodologies, such as edits
and imputation, that help EIA meet data quality standards.
EIA has a specific agency-wide Quality Assurance/Quality
Control program with products tiered by size and impact.
EIA utilizes the SMIP and its directives to evaluate the
functionality and data quality of surveys and products and to
implement projects to make both targeted and full
methodological improvements to surveys and products that
enhance data quality.
How well does the
In terms of. functionality, the SMIP supports improvement of EIA 's
SMIP support
statistical methodologies and data quality in the following ways:
improvement of EIA's
statistical
SMIP works well to provide a means to engage staff in
methodologies and
completing evaluations of survey/product methodologies and
data quality?
data quality.
SMIP works well to help identify when and how to undertake
improvement projects.
SMIP works well to provide the framework for EIA managers
to plan and allocate personnel and resources for evaluation
and improvement process projects.
B-7
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Question/Topic
Progress/Accomplishments
SMIP provided the initial identification for new skills and
personnel needed to support statistical methodological
improvements.
SMIP works well to unify EIA staff on the need to improve
methodologies and data quality.
SMIP helps to continue and to catalyze other similar
statistical practice projects, such as maintaining survey
process documentation and adopting new statistical
standards.
As a specific example of how the SMIP affects methodological
improvements and resulting data quality, EIA staff conducted a full
methodological improvement process for the EIA-877 Winter Heating
Fuels Telephone Survey, which samples sellers of heating oil and
propane to estimate heating fuel prices. EIA-877 produces valuable
data for stakeholders, particularly state energy agencies, to
understand the costs associated with home heating during winter
months. EIA had operated the previous survey design for numerous
years. In 2019, EIA statistical researchers and survey managers
under the guidance of the SMIP developed a detailed project to
improve each statistical aspect of the survey to improve the data
collection process and the overall data quality.
Ultimately, the project specifically:
1) Developed a new, more market-representative frame of
outlets from which to sample (This new frame utilized various
sources of third-party and administrative data, including U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages data.)
2) Created new price estimation and variance estimation
programs to process data better and meet data quality
standards
3) Created a new imputation program for unreported annual
sales volumes utilized as part of the improved price
estimation methodology
4) Created a new weighted volume response rate program to be
able to better evaluate how the survey was performing with
respect to response rate standards and effects on data quality
What best practices
For possibly applying to agency-wide practices, the SMIP's most
should be adopted
applicable successes would be:
from the SMIP (on an
agency-wide basis for
Developing a framework for projects that can be flexible and
opportunistic
B-8
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Question/Topic
Progress/Accomplishments
program and
Aligning the improvement of methodologies and data quality
functional activities)?
with staff roles and skills
SMIP' accomplishments come from completing projects that
evaluate and improve statistical methodologies and resulting data
quality. The SMIP is most effective as the framework for these
projects and could serve as an example to help improve other agency
activities. By providing a project framework, the SMIP provides staff
with the reason to identify ways to engage in improving data quality,
including through defining their own job roles and improving their
skills, and it provides managers with the actionable accountability to
require staff to engage in these projects. In simpler terms, it makes
staff question how to do things better, and it produces the demand on
managers to pursue actively ways to make things better.
Correspondingly, the SMIP's framework structure is flexible with
scope and needs of projects defined by staff themselves to help
improve their own work and allows staff to schedule projects to
accommodate operational needs. With this flexibility, staff can
continue data production while also seizing on improvement
opportunities when they present themselves. Finding ways to
implement similar flexible and staff-accountable frameworks across
the agency could be beneficial to EIA.
What aspects of these
The following are the aspects of the SMIP's design that help result in
tools and methods lead
its ongoing success:
to improved
outcomes?
Actually implementing the plan through the outlined
processes
Continually referencing and using the plan
Incorporating flexible scoping of the processes and their
schedules to adapt to EIA's mission and staff responsibilities
The SMIP project framework structure is what provides it with tools
that help its implementation to improve statistical methodologies and
data quality.
What aspects of these
The following are possible improvement areas to the SMIP that EIA
processes could be
might consider in the future:
made more effective
or efficient?
Interconnecting better with plans developed for individual
surveys and products
Expanding the types of processes governed by SMIP to
include things such as more exploratory and/or research-
oriented projects
B-9
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
3.
DOE Category Management
Lead DOE Program/Support Office: Office of Acquisition Management (OAM) and NNSA
Acquisition and Project Management (NA-APM)
Description: The Office of Acquisition Management (OAM) coordinates with NNSA's Office
of Acquisition and Project Management (NA-APM) to manage procurement systems and provide
procurement policy & oversight for DOE Procurement Offices (POs). With respect to
procurement transactions the POs enter into, approve, administer, modify, closeout, terminate,
and execute other actions as necessary.
The Office and Management and Budget (OMB) has mandated that agencies utilize Category
Management (CM) to buy common goods and services. To accomplish this, OAM will issue
policy, establish annual goals, and lead a CM Working Group (CMWG) to identify opportunities
resulting from analyzing spend data found in the Federal Procurement Data System, Strategic
Integrated Procurement Enterprise System, purchase card database, Management and Operating
Subcontract Reporting Capability, General Service Administration's Data to Decisions, and PO
forecasts.
Enterprise Learning Agenda. This evaluation supports the DOE's understanding of the
following ELA question:
What factors most influence the Department and NNSA's ability to manage
procurement systems and provide procurement policy & oversight for DOE
Procurement Offices (POs)?
Evaluation Questions. The DOE seeks the answer the following evaluation questions and their
sub-components in this study:
How does the Office of Acquisition Management (OAM) coordinate with NNSA's
Office of Acquisition and Project Management (NA-APM) to manage procurement
systems and provide procurement policy & oversight?
How does OAM coordinate with NA-APM to manage processes with respect to
procurement transactions the POs enter into, approve, administer, modify, closeout,
terminate, and execute other actions as necessary?
How does OAM issue policy, establish annual goals, and lead a CM Working Group
(CMWG) to identify opportunities resulting from analyzing spend data?
How does OAM work with NA-APM to collect, analyze, and disseminate large
amounts of spend data?
How do OAM and NA-APM processes ensure the ability to actively monitor,
evaluate, and meet data quality standards?
What best practices should be adopted from OAM and NA-APM on an agency-wide
basis for program and functional activities?
What aspects of these tools and methods lead to improved outcomes?
What aspects of these processes could be made more effective or efficient?
B-10
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Impact: The potential effects of CM are:
Eliminating redundancies, increasing efficiency, and delivering more value and
savings from DOE's acquisition program
More effectively managed contract spending through a balance of Government-wide,
agency-wide, and local contracts
Continued achievement of small business goals and other socioeconomic
requirements
Data & Evaluation Methods:
Step 1 - Each PO establishes an annual CM plan for the designated Fiscal Year(s).
Step 2 - POs identify a procurement strategy for each requirement in their plan.
Step 3 - POs establish their FY goals and submit to OAM.
Step 4 - OAM collects all plans, establishes Department plan with goals, and submits to OFPP.
Step 5 - POs work with the CMWG to identify opportunities to consolidate requirements across
the department and/or across programs/offices.
Step 6 - Heads of Contracting Activity (HCA)/Procurement Directors provide status reports as
needed to OAM. OAM tracks status and briefs OFPP as required.
Evidence Use and Dissemination. DOE program staff would receive recommendations on
activities that lead to greater goal achievement, as well as activities that could be adapted to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of surveillance reviews. Results will be presented to
DOE program managers and senior leadership, published on the DOE website, and shared in the
DOE's Evidence and Evaluation Community of Practice.
The CMWG leads DOE's CM implementation. Each HCA assigns dedicated staff
to participate in the CMWG.
The DOE Acquisition Council governs the CMWG.
Progress and Accomplishments:
The following are Category Management accomplishments over the last 3 years:
Negotiated the establishment of DOE Facility Management Contracts as Tier 1
(FY19).
Chartered the Category Management Working Group (CMWG) in to lead the
implementation of Category Management (CM) and strategic acquisition
management initiatives within DOE (July 2019).
Established the DOE CM Process to build the annual DOE CM Plan for
submission to OMB (FY19).
Established data analytics process to provide a framework and data analysis in
support Procurement Management Review (PMRs) (FY19).
Published department CM policy in Acquisition Guide Chapter 8.3 (June 2020).
Developed DOE CM training specific to DOE CM strategy. Trained 480
Contracting Officers and Contract Specialists to date. Also trained acquisition
leadership on oversite expectations and techniques. (Ongoing).
B-11
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Emphasized data assurance via the CMWG and PMRs (Ongoing)
Established a portion of the DOE Contract Inventory process to routinely
designate competed, socioeconomic awards as Tier 1-SB and assist with efforts to
increase equity in contracting (May 2021).
Finalized a list of DOE Preferred Solutions (DPSs) which includes 6 contract
solutions that will further DOE's CM achievement (June 2021).
Ongoing maturation of DOE data analytics efforts which will enhance our ability
to create new, more efficient DOE CM opportunities and contract vehicles
(Ongoing).
Integrated CM oversite into the department's PMR process (FY20).
Achieved 97% ($19.9B) and 134% ($26.8B) of Spend Under Management goal in
FY19 and FY20 respectively.
Achieved 56% ($197M) and 87% ($171.4M) of Best-In-Class goal in FY19 and
FY20 respectively.
4.
Optimize DOE Corporate Business Systems & Services for Cloud-Based Delivery
Lead DOE Program/Support Office: Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
Description: The Office of Chief Financial Officer manages over 30 IT systems and other tools
that provide corporate business solutions to the Department of Energy (DOE). These systems
support enterprise-level financial transactions, accounting, audit, budget, internal controls,
business intelligence, procurement, human resources, travel, employee training and performance
evaluations, and many other functions. Some of these systems are approaching end-of-life; others
have support contracts that are either expiring or require exercising options to continue.
The Office and Management and Budget has mandated that agency-managed IT systems must be
converted to cloud-based solutions by FY 2021. To meet this goal, OCFO will conduct an
evaluation to determine the optimal mix of which DOE corporate business systems should be
migrated to the cloud "as-is", which should be upgraded during migration, and which systems
can be consolidated and/or retired.
Enterprise Learning Agenda. This evaluation supports the DOE's understanding of the
following ELA question:
What factors most influence the Department's ability support conversion of OCFO-
managed IT systems to cloud-based solutions by FY 2021?
Evaluation Questions. The DOE seeks the answer the following evaluation questions and their
sub-components in this study:
How does the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) coordinate to determine
the optimal mix of which DOE corporate business systems should be migrated to the
cloud:
"As-is",
Which should be upgraded during migration, and
Which systems can be consolidated and/or retired?
B-12
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
How do OCFO processes ensure the ability to actively manage, monitor, evaluate,
and meet IT support standards for both cloud applications and corporate business
systems?
How does OCFO the OCFO IT strategy ensure effective software and hardware
solutions for corporate business services to current DOE capabilities?
What best practices should be adopted from OCFO on an agency-wide basis for IT
cloud migration program and functional activities?
Activities: The OCFO will engage a leading private sector provider of Federal IT services to
conduct a comprehensive study of DOE's corporate business system portfolio and to recommend
an optimal strategy for cloud-based migration of its systems. The study will compare current
leading software and hardware solutions for corporate business services to current DOE
capabilities. The study will further examine the structure and terms of existing DOE IT contracts
and determine an optimal mix of strategy to continue as-is, renew, or enter into new contracts.
Timeline: OCFO anticipates 6-9 months will be required to issue a contract for the study,
conduct strategic analysis, and to issue recommendations. Implementation of the study's
recommendations is anticipated to occur in stages over the next 1-2 years as OCFO migrates
some systems to the cloud, acquires new cloud-based solutions, and retires and/or consolidates
other systems.
Data: Data gathered for this evaluation may include:
reviewing DOE's current and anticipated corporate business process requirements
comparing current DOE IT system capabilities to meet business process
requirements VS. other available IT system solutions
predicting total cost for migrating existing DOE systems to the cloud and
associated operations & maintenance effort VS. acquiring new solutions
reviewing DOE's existing contract terms with IT service providers to determine
whether to upgrade DOE systems, consolidate and/or retire systems, or maintain
current systems in a cloud-based environment
Evidence Use and Dissemination. DOE program staff would receive recommendations on
activities that lead to greater goal achievement, as well as activities that could be adapted to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of surveillance reviews. Results will be presented to
DOE program managers and senior leadership, published on the DOE website, and shared in the
DOE's Evidence and Evaluation Community of Practice.
Progress and Accomplishments: In 2020, an independent Business Systems Assessment was
performed of OCFO's business systems and system architecture. This included an assessment of:
Current OCFO offices and interconnection of functions
OCFO processes and supporting OCFO systems
Process automation opportunities
Process improvement opportunities based on pain points
B-13
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
The assessment resulted in recommendations to OCFO to implement as it pertains to staff,
business processes, and associated technology:
Area
Recommendations
Staff
1. Improve communications and enhance transparency for OCFO system
users
2. Define training plan for OCFO systems, including Data Warehouse and
OCFO system training plan
3. Prepare OCFO workforce for enhanced future systems portfolio, including
development of an OCFO future work strategy and plan
Process
4. Define Data Strategy as an enhanced capability for the Department
5. Scale robotics process automation (RPA) operations for the Department
6. Refine governance and change management to increase the voice of the
customer
Technology
7. Cloud Migration and Modernization, including to conduct the migration
and modernize application portfolio in leveraging the cloud
8. Business System Transformation, to include financial operations and
procurement, budget execution and formulation, and human resources and
payroll systems
9. Establish innovation capability for emerging technology in coordination
with OCIO
10. Data integration and modernization, including optimization of data
warehouse performance for cloud infrastructure
OCFO has already taken steps to implement the recommendations listed above.
B-14
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
Appendix C. DOE Capacity Assessment of Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT SUMMARY: In assessing the coverage, quality, methods,
effectiveness, and independence of the of the Department of Energy's (DOE) statistics, evaluation,
research, and analysis personnel, agency infrastructure (i.e., DOE elements, and sub-elements),
and current and planned evidence building activities, the DOE Evaluation Officer has determined
the current personnel, agency infrastructure, and activities dedicated to statistics, evaluation,
research, and analysis are commensurate with the DOE mission and programs - and in alignment
with the Department's Strategic Goals for FY2022-26.
The need for resources, agency infrastructure, and evidence building activities will be continuously
monitored via DOE Strategic Human Capital Planning, as well as feedback received from the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for future budget cycles and oversight of management
initiatives (e.g., Strategic Planning).
In addition, the new 95Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations (OCED) will conduct analyses
and evaluation of Clean Energy initiatives using a systematic approach that is informed by, and
integrated with, existing clean energy innovation initiatives across DOE's diverse program and
functional offices, sites and associated National Laboratories, as well as serving as the
Department's hub for accelerating the maturation of near- and mid-term clean energy
technologies and systems with the goal of quicker commercial adoption and increased
availability.
95 FY 2022 Budget in Brief (energy.gov)
C-1
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation
Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
98AE
(refer to OP)
(refer to OP)
1
1. Engagements involving the Arctic.
Goal 5, Promote Equity
2. Innovative solutions
and Energy Justice
3. Existing energy projects
AITO
2,500
1,500
1
1. AITO strategy is focused on answering
Goal 3, Advance
common questions, including:
Science Discovery
Mission: How can we better apply AI
and National
investments to address the
Laboratory
Department's missions and policies
Innovation
(e.g., equity, energy justice, climate
Goal 7, Operational
resilience, and cyber)?
Excellence
Investments: How do we optimize DOE
AI investments for impact?
Cybersecurity: How can we support the
development and deployment of AI as a
force multiplier for DOE cyber
strategy?
Complex Problem Solving: Are we
strategically planning to use AI to
mitigate risks and solve complex
challenges - mainly where there are no
data sets (e.g., explosives, cyber, and
nuclear)?
96 FY 2022 Budget in Brief (energy.gov)
97 FY 2022 Budget in Brief (energy.gov
98 FY 2022 Budget in Brief (energy.gov). page 83: "Office of Policy (OP): Funding increase will support broadening OP's mission to include the Office of
Strategic Planning and Policy (OSPP), Office of Energy Jobs, and merging the Arctic Energy Office (AEO) into OP."
C-2
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Emerging AI: What are next-
generation AI practices, and where are
gaps in current investments versus
mission needs?
Leadership: How do we better partner
across communities to apply holistic
synergies and international AI
leadership?
REFERNCE: AITO Program Plan 11-10-
2021.pdf (energy.gov)
ARPA-E
427,000
500,000
53
ARPA-E Exploratory Topics are developed
Goal 3, Advance Science
through the FOAs, and include:
Discovery and National
Laboratory Innovation
1. Exploratory Topic A: Extremely Durable
Concretes and Cementitious Materials
2. Exploratory Topic B: Downhole Tools to
Enable Enhanced Geothermal Systems
3. Exploratory Topic C: Leveraging
Innovations Supporting Nuclear Energy
4. Exploratory Topic D: Diagnostic Resource
Teams to Support the Validation of
Potentially Transformative Fusion-Energy
Concepts
5.
Exploratory Topic F: High Value Methane
Pyrolysis
6. Exploratory Topics G & T: Supporting
Entrepreneurial Energy Discoveries
7. Exploratory Topic H: Establishing
C-3
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Validation Sites for Field-Level Emissions
Quantification of Agricultural Bioenergy
Feedstock Production
8. Exploratory Topic I: Electricity System
Models for Carbon Capture Resources
9.
Exploratory Topic J: Biotechnologies to
Ensure a Robust Supply of Critical
Materials for Clean Energy
10. Exploratory Topic K: Recycle Underutilized
Solids to Energy
11. Exploratory Topic L: Insulating Nanofluids
and Solids to Upgrade our Large Aging
Transformer Equipment
12. Exploratory Topic M: Mining Incinerated
Disposal Ash Streams
13. Exploratory Topic N: Waste into X
14. Exploratory Topic O: Direct Removal of
Carbon Dioxide from Oceanwater
15. Exploratory Topic P: Direct Removal of
Carbon Dioxide from Ambient Air
16. Exploratory Topic Q: Connecting Aviation
By Lighter Electric Systems
17. Exploratory Topic R: Lowering CO2:
Models to Optimize Train Infrastructure,
Vehicles, and Energy Storage
18. Exploratory Topic S: Topology
C-4
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Optimization and Additive Manufacturing
for Performance Enhancement of High
Temperature and High Pressure Heat
Exchangers
19. Exploratory Topic U: Sulfur Hexafluoride
(SF6)-Free Routes for Electrical Equipment
AU
206,320
206,320
32
1. Comprehensive Epidemiologic Data
Goal 2, Strengthen
Resource (CEDR) System
the Nation 's Energy
2. Computerized Accident/Incident Reporting
Security, Resiliency,
System (CAIRS)
Affordability, and
Reliability
3. DOE OPEXShare Lessons Learned
database
Goal 7, Operational
Excellence
4. Fire Protection
5. Occurrence Reporting and Processing
System (ORPS)
6. Radiation Exposure Monitoring System
(REMS)
7. Radiological Source Registry and Tracking
(RSRT)
8. Safety Basis Information System (SBIS)
9. Suspect/Counterfeit and Defective Items
C-5
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
BPA
99
self-financed
100
self-financed
321
1. Bonneville Power Administration (BPA)
Goal 2, Strengthen the
and receives no
and receives no
has created a Strategic Plan centered on
Nation's Energy
direct annual
direct annual
what BPA intends to do in the near term to
Security, Resiliency,
appropriations
appropriations
deliver on their public responsibilities. This
Affordability, and
from Congress
from Congress
strategic plan with wide input from the
Reliability
region. This strategic plan is updated with a
Strategic Progress Update.
2. BPA also conducts an Integrated Program
Review (IPR), which plays a significant role
in BPA's overall financial planning process.
It provides the public an opportunity to
review and comment on BPA's spending
levels for its capital and expense programs
before establishing them in rate cases.
BACKGROUND: BPA incorporates program
plans in 4 areas:
Power
Transmission
Energy Efficiency
Environment, Fish & Wildlife
The development of future data requires the
forecast of revenues, expenses and investment
as detailed in DOE Order RA 6120-2.
99 FY 2022 Budget in Brief (energy.gov)
100 FY 2022 Budget in Brief (energy.gov)
C-6
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
CESER
364,506
419,000
15
1. CESER Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP)
Goal 2, Strengthen the
Activities
Nation' 's Energy
2. Cybersecurity for Energy Delivery Systems
Security, Resiliency,
Research and Development
Affordability, and
Reliability
3.
Cybersecurity Testing for Resilient
Industrial Control Systems
4. Cybersecurity for the Operational
Technology Environment (CyOTE)
5. Department of Energy CyberForce Program
6. Clean Energy Cybersecurity Accelerator
Program
CF
53,590
56,591
52
1. Finance & Accounting
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
Energy Innovation
Prepares the Department's consolidated
and Deployment on
financial statements, Agency Financial
a Path to Net-Zero
Report, and other managerial reports.
Emissions by 2050
Leads the Department's internal
Goal 5, Promote
controls, fraud risk management, and
Equity and Energy
payment integrity programs.
Justice
Delivers timely and reliable financial
Goal 7, Operational
management reporting and analysis.
Excellence
2. Financial Policy and Audit Resolution
Provides policy guidance and support to
Departmental offices on audit
resolution, coordination, and follow-up.
C-7
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
3. Budget Formulation & Execution
Overall planning and implementation
for budget formulation, analysis,
execution, and evaluation.
Supports development and management
of the Department's Agency
Performance Report, Strategic Plan, and
associated evaluation of progress of
goals.
Specialized analysis and prioritization
of Departmental resources for the
Future-Years Energy Program (FYEP)
and other strategic analysis of budget
resources.
4. Corporate Business Systems
Provides qualified Information
Technology project management
support.
Oversees completion of internal and
external CF Information Technology
reporting.
CI
5,000
6,000
3
1. Serving as a central point of contact for
Goal 5, Promote Equity
interactions on congressional matters, the
and Energy Justice
congressional affairs team offers expertise
in coordinating and directing the legislative
programs of the Department, as well as the
significant relationships between
Departmental officials and Members of
Congress.
C-8
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
2. The Office of Intergovernmental and
External Affairs (IGEA) serves as the
Departmental interface for state, tribal and
local governments to ensure easy and timely
access to relevant programs, technological
assistance, funding opportunities and other
DOE resources.
EA
79,070
83,384
14
1. Appraisal Process Protocols provide an
Goal 7, Operational
overview of the general process that applies
Excellence
to all of the functions and activities
conducted under the Office of Enterprise
Assessments (EA) Independent Oversight
Program. The protocols describe the
principal activities used to evaluate the
effectiveness of DOE line management
organizations in implementing DOE policy
and requirements, and the overall
philosophy, approach, scope, and methods
to be used when conducting appraisals. The
three EA offices that are principally
responsible for implementing the
Independent Oversight Program - the Office
of Safeguards and Security Assessments; the
Office of Cyber Assessments; and the
Office of Environment, Safety and Health
Assessments - have developed and
implemented office-specific procedures and
techniques for accomplishing their
respective responsibilities that complement
the overall processes described in this
C-9
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
document. These documents are also
available on EA's web pages.
ED
10,169
20,000
6
1.
Equity in Energy - designed to expand the
Goal 5, Promote
inclusion and participation of individuals in
Equity and Energy
underserved communities, such as
Justice
minorities, women, veterans, and formerly
Goal 7, Operational
incarcerated persons, in all the programs of
Excellence
the Department of Energy and in the private
energy sector. The Department's 200-Day
Equity Assessment completed in 2021
pursuant to EO 13985101 revealed a range of
barriers underserved communities face
when accessing DOE's procurement,
funding, R&D, and deployment processes
and activities.
2. Promoting Energy Justice - implementing
Justice40 Initiative - a plan to deliver 40%
of the overall benefits of climate
investments to disadvantaged communities
and inform equitable research, development,
and deployment within the DOE. With the
beta launch of the Energy Justice Dashboard
(BETA), DOE is working to better
understand how the Department's funding
and investments are distributed to
overburdened and underserved communities
that have been left behind and unheard for
too long. The Energy Justice Dashboard
101 Executive Order (EO) 13985: Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government
C-10
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
(BETA) is a pilot data visualization tool that
displays DOE-specific investments in
communities across the country
experiencing disproportionately high and
adverse economic, human health, climate-
related, environmental, and other
cumulative impacts. The Dashboard
displays DOE cost data - grants,
cooperative agreements, and contracts- -
from more than twenty-five DOE program
offices, for the fiscal years 2019 to present.
EE
2,861,760
4,732,000
143
1. Outcome Evaluations
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
2. Impact Evaluations
Energy Innovation
3. In-Progress Peer Reviews
and Deployment on
a Path to Net-Zero
Most of EERE's new investments directly
Emissions by 2050
support deployments or demonstrations of
Goal 3, Advance
technologies that show viable pathways for
Science Discovery
achieving EERE's five programmatic priorities:
and National
Decarbonizing the electricity sector.
Laboratory
Innovation
Decarbonizing transportation across all
modes: air, sea, rail, and road.
Goal 5, Promote
Decarbonizing the industrial sector.
Equity and Energy
Reducing the carbon footprint of buildings.
Justice
Decarbonizing the agriculture sector,
specifically focused on the nexus between
energy and water.
EERE consists of several offices that support
EERE's mission:
C-11
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Energy Efficiency
Advanced Manufacturing
Buildings
Federal Energy Management
Weatherization and Intergovernmental
Renewable Power
Geothermal
Solar
Wind
Water
Sustainable Transportation
Bioenergy
Hydrogen and Fuel Cells
Vehicles
4. The M&O Contractor for the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) is
assessed against all elements of the SOW:
Golden Reading Room: Other NREL
Documents I Department of Energy
REFERENCE: Downloads of EERE outcome
evaluation reports can be found in the EERE
Evaluation Library.
C-12
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
EIA
126,800
126,800
259
1. Petroleum & Other Liquids
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
Energy Innovation
a.
This Week in Petroleum
and Deployment on
b.
Weekly Petroleum Status
a Path to Net-Zero
Emissions by 2050
Report
Goal 5, Promote
2. Natural Gas
Equity and Energy
Justice
a.
Weekly Natural Gas Storage
Report
b.
Natural Gas Weekly Update
3. Electricity
a.
Electric Power Monthly
b.
Electricity Data Browser
4. Consumption & Efficiency
a.
Residential Energy
Consumption Survey (RECS)
b.
Commercial Buildings Energy
Consumption Survey (CBECS)
5. Coal
a.
Quarterly Coal Report
b. Coal Data Browser
6. Renewable & Alternative Fuels
C-13
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
a.
Alternative Fuel Vehicle
Browser
7. Nuclear & Uranium
a.
Daily Status of Nuclear Outages
8. Total Energy
a.
Monthly Energy Review
b.
Annual Energy Review
9. Analysis & Projects
Short-Term Energy Outlook
Annual Energy Outlook
International Energy Outlook
10. Markets & Finance
a.
Market Prices and Uncertainty
Report
b.
Energy & Financial Markets:
What Drives Crude Oil Prices?
11. Environment
a.
U.S. Energy-Related Carbon
Dioxide Emissions
C-14
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
b.
Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide
Emissions at the State Level,
through 2018
12. Energy Disruptions
a.
Energy Disruptions
13. U.S. States
a.
State Energy Data System
(SEDS)
14. Maps
a.
U.S. Energy Atlas
b.
U.S. Energy Mapping System
c.
Gulf of Mexico
15. International
a.
International Energy Statistics
16. Regional Dashboards & Data
a.
New England Dashboard
b.
Southern California Daily
Energy Report
c.
Energy Disruptions
BACKGROUND: The U.S. Energy
Information Administration (EIA) is committed
C-15
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
to enhancing the value of its free and open data
by making it available through an Application
Programming Interface (API) and open data
tools to better serve our customers. The data in
the API is also available in bulk file, in Excel
via the add-in, in Google Sheets via an add-on,
and via widgets that embed interactive data
visualizations of EIA data on any website. By
making EIA data available in machine-readable
formats, the creativity in the private, the non-
profit, and the public sectors can be harnessed to
find new ways to innovate and create value-
added services powered by public data.
Currently, EIA's API contains the following
main data sets:
Hourly electricity operating data,
including actual and forecast
demand, net generation, and the
power flowing between electric
systems
408,000 electricity series organized
into 29,000 categories
30,000 State Energy Data System
series organized into 600 categories
115,052 petroleum series and
associated categories
34,790 U.S. crude imports series
and associated categories
C-16
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
11,989 natural gas series and
associated categories
132,331 coal series and associated
categories
3,872 Short-Term Energy Outlook
series and associated categories
368,466 Annual Energy Outlook
series and associated categories
92,836 International energy series
The EIA API is offered as a free public service,
although registration is required.
EM
7,586,200
8,011,870
213
1. EM annual performance results can be found
Goal 2, Strengthen
in the Department of Energy Annual
the Nation' 's Energy
Performance Reports. EM manages cleanup
Security, Resiliency,
contracts at the following sites:
Affordability, and
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Reliability
(https://www.bnl.gov/world/)
Goal 3, Advance
Energy Technology Engineering Center
Science Discovery
(https://www.etec.energy.gov/)
and National
Hanford Office of River Protection
Laboratory
(https://hanford.gov/page.cfm/orp)
Innovation
Hanford Richland Operations Office
Goal 5, Promote
(https://www.hanford.gov/page.cfm/RL)
Equity and Energy
Idaho Operations Office
Justice
(https://www.energy.gov/ne/nuclear-
facility-operations/idaho-operations-office)
Goal 6, Advance
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Clean-Up of
(https://www.llnl.gov/llnl search/site/clean
Radioactive and
up)
Chemical Waste
C-17
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Los Alamos Field Office
(https://www.energy.gov/em-
la/environmental-management-los-alamos-
field-office)
Moab UMTRA Project
(https://www.gjem.energy.gov/)
Nevada National Security Site
(https://www.nnss.gov/pages/about.html)
Oak Ridge
(https://www.emcbc.doe.gov/seb/orrcc/)
Paducah
ittps://www.energy.gov/pppo/paducah-
site)
Portsmouth
(https://www.energy.gov/pppo/portsmouth-
site)
Sandia National Laboratory
(https://www.sandia.gov/)
Savannah River Site
(https://www.srs.gov/general/srs-
home.html)
Separations Process Research Unit (SPRU)
(https://wwW.spru.energy.gov)
West Valley Demonstration Project
(https://www.wv.doe.gov/)
2. EM manages cleanup at the following two
sites through M&O Contracts:
Savannah River Site (EM Operated in
conjunction with NNSA)
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP)
C-18
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
3. EM also manages a national laboratory
through an M&O Contract:
Savannah River National Laboratory, which
is the DOE Office of Environmental
Management (EM) national laboratory, and
its resources are used to assist in the cleanup
of the Cold War legacy waste for which EM
is accountable.
BACKGROUND: The Savannah River
National Laboratory Policy Office (as known as
the EM Laboratory Policy Office (EM LPO)
sponsors and coordinates the involvement of
national laboratories in support of the EM
mission activities, in accordance with the EM
National Laboratory Governance Framework
for the Savannah River National Laboratory
(SRNL), which includes the charter for the EM
National Laboratory Network (EMNLN). The
EM LPO leads oversight and management of
SRNL in partnership with the National Nuclear
Security Agency (NNSA) Office of Policy with
support from the EM and NNSA Savannah
River Site/Field Offices.
FECM
750,000
890,000
90
1. FE follows a Site-Specific approach to
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
evaluate its M&O contractors that uses
Energy Innovation
detailed performance criteria. FE's objective
and Deployment on
performance criteria are defined based on
a Path to Net-Zero
quantifiable metrics and performance
Emissions by 2050
C-19
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
targets48 performance goals are established
Goal 2, Strengthen
in the overarching M&O contract for the
the Nation 's Energy
Strategic Petroleum Reserve. The Available
Security, Resiliency,
Award Fee shall be established considering
Affordability, and
the level of complexity, difficulty, cost
Reliability
effectiveness, and risk associated with
Goal 5, Promote
specific objectives/incentives defined in the
Performance Evaluation and Measurement
Equity and Energy
Justice
Plan (PEMP). The Performance Evaluation
and Measurement Plan(s) sets out the
criteria upon which the Contractor will be
evaluated relating to any technical,
schedule, management, and/or cost
objectives selected for evaluation. These
criteria are generally objective, but may also
include subjective criteria.
BACKGROUND: The Office of Fossil Energy
and Carbon Management (FECM) manages the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve Office (SPRO)
M&O Contract. The Strategic Petroleum
Reserve (SPR), the world's largest supply of
emergency crude oil, consisting of salt caverns
storing crude oil in Texas and Louisiana. This
was established primarily to reduce the impact
of disruptions in supplies of petroleum products
and to carry out obligations of the United States
under the international energy program.
GC
35,000
38,000
6
1. The Deputy General Counsel for
Goal 5, Promote
Administration directs, manages, supervises
Equity and Energy
Justice
C-20
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
and coordinates the activities and functions
Goal 7, Operational
assigned to the following offices:
Excellence
Assistant General Counsel for Ethics
and Personnel Law
Associate General Counsel for Fiscal
and Information Law
2. The Deputy General Counsel for Litigation,
Regulation and Enforcement directs,
manages, supervises and coordinates the
activities and functions assigned to the
following Assistant General Counsels
responsible for:
Litigation
Enforcement
Legislation, Regulation, and Energy
Efficiency
3. The Deputy General Counsel for
Environment and Compliance directs,
manages, supervises and coordinates the
activities and functions assigned to the
following Assistant General Counsels
responsible for:
Environment
C-21
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
International and National Security
Programs
NEPA Policy and Compliance
4. The Deputy General Counsel for
Transactions, Technology, & Contractor
Human Resources directs, manages,
supervises and coordinates the activities and
functions assigned to the following
Assistant General Counsels responsible for:
Procurement and Financial Assistance
Technology Transfer and Intellectual
Property
Contractor Human Resources
5. The Deputy General Counsel for Energy
Policy directs, manages, supervises and
coordinates the activities and functions
assigned to the following Assistant General
Counsels responsible for:
Civilian Nuclear Programs
Standard Contract Management
Electricity and Fossil Energy
6. Office of the Chief Counsel for Loans
Programs
7. Office of the Chief Counsel for Loans
C-22
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Programs
8. Office of the Chief Counsel for ARPA-E
HC
24,918
28,250
29
1.
Human Capital Assessments and
Goal 5, Promote
Compliance
Equity and Energy
Justice
2. Employee and Labor Relations, Policy, and
Oversight
Goal 7, Operational
Excellence
3. Office of Corporate Services (HC-10):
https://www.energy.gov/hc/office-
corporate-services-hc-10
4. Talent Management
5. Corporate Executive Management
REFERENCE: DOE Strategic Human Capital
Plan I Department of Energy
HG
4,262
4,356
10
Over the years, OHA has heard appeals from a
Goal 7, Operational
variety of DOE determinations, including those
Excellence
related:
1. Economic oil regulations
2. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and
Privacy Act appeals
3. Whistleblower matters
4. Exceptions and special redress
5. Dispute resolutions
6. Department's Alternative Fuel
Transportation Program
7. Physician panel reviews of DOE worker
occupational illness claims
C-23
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
8. Payment-equal-to-taxes claims under the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982
9. Civil penalties imposed for violations of
DOE's worker safety and health rule
10. Equity interests in production from Elk Hills
Oil Field, formerly Naval Petroleum
Reserve No. 1.
IA
26,825
30,500
17
1. International Energy Policy, including:
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
Regional and country-specific energy
Energy Innovation
policies and practices, technology
and Deployment on
developments, and market conditions in
a Path to Net-Zero
Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe,
Emissions by 2050
Eurasia, and the Middle East
Goal 3, Advance
Bilateral and multilateral energy treaties
Science Discovery
and obligations
and National
International cooperation in science and
Laboratory
technology
Innovation
Regional and country-specific
opportunities and barriers to energy
markets and services
Trade and investment trends in the
global energy economy
International energy partnerships,
commitments, and agreements
Clean energy policy, technology, and
legislation
2. Technology Development and Deployment,
including:
Research, development, and deployment
(RD&D) strategies
C-24
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Technology research portfolios and
budgets
Energy end-use technologies and
standards, including efficiency in
buildings, transportation, and industry
Energy supply technologies and
standards, including fossil fuels, nuclear
power, and renewable energy
Technical and non-technical barriers to
technology commercialization and
deployment
IE
22,000
122,000
2
1. IE leverages public-private partnerships,
Goal 5, Promote Equity
inter- and intra-governmental coordination,
and Energy Justice
and government-to-government partnerships
to maximize the return on investments in the
future of Native American communities, and
annual Program Review meetings to provide
an opportunity for tribes and Alaska Native
villages to share their successes and best
practices.
BACKGROUND: The Office of Indian
Energy Policy and Programs (IE) is authorized
to fund and implement a variety of
programmatic activities that assist American
Indian Tribes and Alaska Native villages with
energy development, capacity building, energy
cost reduction, and electrification of Indian
lands and homes. IE works with American
Indian Tribes and Alaska Natives to maximize
the value of their energy resources through:
C-25
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Facilitation of energy development
Education and training
Technical assistance
Funding
IG
57,739
78,000
25
1. OIG audit and inspection reports can be
Goal 7, Operational
found here:
Excellence
https://www.energy.gov/ig/calendar-year-
reports
IM
140,200
232,258
30
1. Responsible for the management of the
Goal 7, Operational
Federal Information Technology
Excellence
Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA)
program, DOE IT Governance (i.e., Cyber
Council), the Enterprise IT Project
Management Office (ePMO), DOE Section
508 Program, DOE IT Budget and Capital
Planning and Investment Control (CPIC), IT
Policy, Paperwork Reduction Act, and
Government-wide IT initiatives. This
direction includes enterprise-wide
compliance with external laws, regulations,
policies, and standards.
FY 2018-2022 Information Resource
Management (IRM) Strategy
Department of Energy
U.S. Department of Energy Federal
Information Technology Acquisition
Reform Act (FITARA) Common
Baseline Implementation Plan and Self-
Assessment Department of Energy
C-26
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Instructions for Performing the FY 2023
Agency IT Portfolio Summary (AITPS)
Instructions for Performing the FY 2023
Agency IT Portfolio Details (AITPD)
Submission
IN
N/A
N/A
26
IN protects vital national security information
Goal 4, Ensure
and technologies, representing intellectual
America's Nuclear
property of incalculable value. IN's contribution
Security by Harnessing
to national security is the ability to leverage the
Unparalleled Science
Department's unmatched scientific and
and Technology
technological expertise in support of
Capabilities
policymakers as well as national security
missions in defense, homeland security, cyber
security, intelligence, and energy security.
IN is a member of the U.S. Intelligence
Community.
LM
163,059
428,730
15
1. The LM quarterly Program Updates
Goal 5, Promote
highlight the key initiatives throughout the
Equity and Energy
entire organization including the specific
Justice
contributions and accomplishments of
Goal 6, Advance
individuals responsible for LM's continued
Clean-Up of
success. LM advances in each of the six
Radioactive and
goals are represented:
Chemical Waste
Goal 1 - Protect human health and the
environment.
Goal 2 - Preserve, protect, and share
records and information.
Goal 3 - Safeguard former contractor
workers' retirement benefits.
C-27
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Goal 4 - Sustainably manage and
optimize the use of land and assets.
Goal 5 - Sustain management
excellence.
Goal 6 - Engage the public,
governments, and interested parties
LP
-2,264,000
186,000
7
1. Once LPO closes a loan or loan guarantee,
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
projects are monitored and evaluated
Energy Innovation
throughout project development,
and Deployment on
construction, commissioning, and operation
a Path to Net-Zero
until the loan has been repaid in full. LPO's
Emissions by 2050
team of financial, technical, environmental,
Goal 5, Promote
and legal professionals is dedicated to
Equity and Energy
advancing an all-of-the-above energy
Justice
strategy that avoids, reduces, or sequesters
greenhouse gases.
2. After financial close or first funding,
responsibility for managing a project
transfers from the LPO Origination Division
to the Portfolio Management Division
(PMD). PMD provides ongoing monitoring
and oversight to ensure that the construction
and completion phase of a project is
executed in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the loan documents. PMD is
also responsible for maintaining compliance
with the loan documents terms and
conditions after project completion. Some of
PMD's responsibilities include, but are not
limited to, monitoring borrower activities to
ensure compliance with the loan documents;
C-28
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
monitoring and analyzing project costs,
schedule, and performance quality; and
review borrowers requests for amendments,
consents, or waivers to the loan documents.
MA
54,358
75,358
64
1. Aviation Management
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
2. Executive Secretariat
Energy Innovation
and Deployment on
3. Sustainability Performance
a Path to Net-Zero
4.
Energy Reduction at HQ
Emissions by 2050
5. Real Estate
Goal 5, Promote
Equity and Energy
6. Facilities and Infrastructure
Justice
7. Federal Advisory Committee Management
Goal 7, Operational
Excellence
8. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
9. Personal Property
10. Acquisition and Financial Assistance
11. Certifications and Professional
Development
NE
1,507,600
1,850,500
42
1. NE manages the Idaho National Laboratory
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
(INL) M&O Contract. 43 INL is the
Energy Innovation
nation's leading center for nuclear energy
and Deployment on
research and development.
a Path to Net-Zero
Emissions by 2050
Goal 2, Strengthen
the Nation 's Energy
Security, Resiliency,
Affordability, and
Reliability
C-29
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Goal 5, Promote
Equity and Energy
Justice
Goal 6, Advance
Clean-Up of
Radioactive and
Chemical Waste
NNSA
19,732,200
19,743,000
442
1. Every fiscal year, the NNSA completes an
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
assessment of their management and
Energy Innovation
operating (M&O) partners' effectiveness in
and Deployment on
meeting the performance expectations as
a Path to Net-Zero
established by NNSA in NNSA NAP 540-3.
Emissions by 2050
This assessment is based on an evaluation of
Goal 3, Advance
the annual Performance Evaluation and
Science Discovery
Measurement Plans (PEMPs) linked to each
and National
NNSA site. NNSA performance
assessments are documented annually in a
Laboratory
Performance Evaluation Report (PER), and
Innovation
award fee amounts are documented in a Fee
Goal 4, Ensure
Determination Memorandum.
America's Nuclear
2.
In support of NNSA's major mission areas,
Security by
the NNSA has established procedures to
Harnessing
ensure that the planning, programming,
Unparalleled
budgeting, and evaluation (PPBE) activities
Science and
of the NNSA comply with sound financial
Technology
management principles, specifically to
Capabilities
assess and determine whether progress has
Goal 5, Promote
been made toward achieving identified
Equity and Energy
performance measures at multiple levels
Justice
within the NNSA.
C-30
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Goal 7, Operational
Major missions of the National Nuclear Security
Excellence
Administration include
Maintaining the Stockpile - NNSA ensures
the United States maintains a safe, secure,
and reliable nuclear stockpile through the
application of unparalleled science,
technology, engineering, and
manufacturing.
Nonproliferation - NNSA works to prevent
nuclear weapon proliferation and reduce the
threat of nuclear and radiological terrorism
around the world. The agency endeavors to
prevent the development of nuclear weapons
and the spread of materials or knowledge
needed to create them.
Counter-terrorism and Counter-proliferation
- NNSA plays a key role in preventing,
countering, and responding to a terrorist or
other adversary with a nuclear or
radiological device.
Powering the Nuclear Navy - NNSA
provides militarily effective nuclear
propulsion plants and ensures their safe,
reliable, and long-lived operation.
BACKGROUND: The NNSA is responsible
for eight (8) Government Owned, Contractor
Operated (GOCO) facilities and laboratories,
including three (3) FFRDC national
laboratories; all supported by M&O Contracts:
C-31
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Kansas City National Security Complex
(KCP)
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
(LLNL)(FFRDC)
Los Alamos National Laboratory
(LANL)(FFRDC)(also supported by the
Office of Environmental Management)
Savannah River Site
(SRS)(FFRDC)(Operated in conjunction
with the Office of Environmental
Management (EM))
Naval Nuclear Laboratory
Nevada National Security Site (NNSS)
NNSA Production Office (NPO) Pantex
Plant and Y-12 National Security Complex
Sandia National Laboratory (SNL)
OE
211,720
327,000
19
Most of OE's efforts today are being conducted
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
through the Grid Modernization Initiative, OE
Energy Innovation
program evaluations/peer reviews focus on:
and Deployment on
a Path to Net-Zero
1. Transformer Resilience and Advanced
Emissions by 2050
Components
Goal 2, Strengthen
2. Transmission Reliability
the Nation 's Energy
3. Advanced Grid Modeling
Security, Resiliency,
4. Energy Storage and Power Electronics
Affordability, and
5. Advanced Cables and Conductors
Reliability
(including high temperature
Goal 5, Promote
superconductivity)
Equity and Energy
6. High Temperature Superconductivity
Justice
C-32
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
7. Renewable and Distributed Systems
Integration (RDSI)
8. Visualization and Controls
Reviews prior to 2015:
ttps://www.energy.gov/oe/reviews-archived
OP
7,000
28,996
4
Office of Technology Policy focus areas
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
include:
Energy Innovation
Energy Innovation
and Deployment on
Energy Earthshots Initiative
a Path to Net-Zero
National Climate Strategy
Emissions by 2050
Office of Deployment and Infrastructure
Goal 2, Strengthen
the Nation 's Energy
Policy focus areas include:
Security, Resiliency,
Supply Chains
Affordability, and
Clean Energy Reliability
Reliability
Office of State, Local, and Tribal Policy
Goal 4, Ensure
focus areas include:
America's Nuclear
Communities LEAP
Security by
Place-based Strategy
Harnessing
Justice40
Unparalleled
Cross-DOE Collaboration
Science and
Office of Energy Jobs focus areas include:
Technology
U.S. Energy and Employment Report
Capabilities
DOE Labor Working Group - The
Goal 5, Promote
DOE Labor Working Group is a forum
Equity and Energy
Justice
C-33
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
for DOE and labor unions to engage on
key energy topics.
OTT
0
19,470
10
1. OTT conducts data management and
Goal 1, Drive U.S.
analysis, evidence-based impact evaluations,
Energy Innovation
and stakeholder engagement. The office also
and Deployment on
oversees two major DOE initiatives,
a Path to Net-Zero
the Technology Commercialization
Emissions by 2050
Fund (TCF) and the Lab Partnering Service
Goal 2, Strengthen
2.
OTT also compiles market analysis reports,
the Nation 's Energy
technology roadmaps, and other analyses of
Security, Resiliency,
technology-market fit and pathways to
Affordability, and
commercialization from across the
Reliability
Department of Energy, which OTT has
Goal 3, Advance
compiled to highlight the most useful ones.
Science Discovery
and National
Laboratory
Innovation
Goal 5, Promote
Equity and Energy
Justice
PA
4,000
5,954
2
1. Identify opportunities to develop new
Goal 7, Operational
content and share existing content about
Excellence
DOE's portfolio.
2. Monitor media, legislative, and stakeholder
communications to advise senior agency
officials about emerging news and public
affairs issues and concerns.
ttps://www.energy.gov/newsroom
C-34
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
PM
13,000
13,307
9
1. The Office of Project Management (PM)
Goal 7, Operational
provides a monthly assessment of DOE's
Excellence
portfolio of capital assets projects, which is
summarized in the monthly Project
Dashboard report. This report assesses all
active projects with an established
performance baseline, including scope, cost,
and schedule. Based on current
performance:
GREEN projects are expected to meet their
performance baseline
YELLOW projects are at-risk of breaching
their performance baselines
RED projects are expected to breach their
performance baselines
2. Root Cause Analysis Report (RCA) 2008 -
The Root Cause Analysis report identifies
the key elements necessary to make the
meaningful changes required to consistently
deliver projects within cost and schedule
performance parameters.
3.
Corrective Action Plan (CAP) 2008 - The
Root Cause Analysis Corrective Action
Plan ensures that the root causes identified
in the Root Cause Analysis report (above)
are addressed with meaningful and lasting
solutions in order to improve contract and
project management performance.
C-35
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
4. RCA/CAP Closure Report of 2011 - This
RCA/CAP Closure Report presents a status
of the Department's initiatives to address
the most significant issues and their
corresponding root causes and officially
closes out most of the issues and root
causes.
5. Overall Contract and Project Management
Improvement Performance Metrics and
Targets:
FY 2008
FY 2009
FY 2010
FY 2011
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
FY 2015
FY 2016
FY 2017
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
SB
3,386
3,752
4
1. Every year, the Small Business
Goal 5, Promote
Administration (SBA) works with each
Equity and Energy
agency to set their prime and
Justice
subcontracting goals and their grades are
Goal 7, Operational
Excellence
C-36
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
based on the agreed upon goals. Each
federal agency has a different small
business contracting goal, negotiated
annually in consultation with the SBA.
The SBA ensures that all the goals meet
the 23 percent target for the federal
government as well as the socio-
economic goals established by statute.
The latest SBA Scorecard can be found
here: DOE FY 2020 Small Business
Procurement Scorecard.
2. SBDU Annual Reports provide a
comprehensive review of DOE
performance in engaging small
businesses. These reports contain a
broad overview of small business prime
contracts, first-tier Management and
Operating (M&O) Subcontracts, and
other subcontracts to small business
SC
7,026,000
7,440,000
114
1.
Technical, cost, schedule, and management
Goal 3, Advance
peer reviews ("Lehman" reviews) of SC
Science Discovery
construction projects and large experimental
and National
equipment
Laboratory
2. Laboratory Appraisals of:
Innovation
Ames Laboratory in Ames, Iowa
Goal 5, Promote
(https://www.ameslab.gov/)
Equity and Energy
Argonne National Laboratory in
Justice
Argonne, Illinois
(https://www.anl.gov/
C-37
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Brookhaven National Laboratory in
Upton, New York
(https://www.bnl.gov/world/)
Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory in Batavia, Illinois
(https://www.fnal.gov/
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory in Berkeley, California
(https://www.lbl.gov/
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, in
Oak Ridge, Tennessee
(https://www.ornl.gov/)
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
in Richland, Washington
(https://www.pnnl.gov/)
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
in Princeton, New Jersey
(https://www.pppl.gov/)
SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory in Stanford, California
(https://www6.slac.stanford.edu/)
Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility in Newport News,
Virginia (https://www.jlab.org/
SC administers research through six major
program offices, spanning a broad range of
disciplines:
Advanced Scientific Computing Research,
Basic Energy Sciences,
Biological and Environmental Research,
C-38
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
Fusion Energy Sciences,
High Energy Physics, and,
Nuclear Physics
SEPA
0
0
4
1.
The Southeastern Power Administration
Goal 2, Strengthen the
(SEPA) constantly evaluates and works to
Nation's Energy
improve execution of their program. This
Security, Resiliency,
includes evaluation of the workforce,
Affordability, and
facilities and operating systems
Reliability
management that support their functions.
This includes awareness of overhead
expenses associated with program execution
and management of those expenses and their
impact on power rates. Program reporting is
via annual reports, which discusses program
status and financial performance.
BACKGROUND: The development of future
data requires the forecast of revenues, expenses
and investment as detailed in DOE Order RA
6120-2.
SWPA
10,400
10,400
8
1. The SWPA announced its new Strategic
Goal 2, Strengthen the
Plan in October 2020. 71 This Strategic
Nation 's Energy
Plan, focused on their vision for SWPA both
Security, Resiliency,
the short and long-term providing a pathway
Affordability, and
to future workforce development,
Reliability
operations, partnerships, and evolving
services. This plan is coupled with an annual
SWPA Performance Plan - including a Goal
Overview. SWPA details performance in
SWPA Annual Reports.
C-39
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and
Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
BACKGROUND: The Southwestern Power
Administration's (SWPA's) mission is to
market and reliably deliver Federal
hydroelectric power with preference to public
bodies and cooperatives. As one of four Power
Marketing Administrations in the United States,
SWPA markets hydroelectric power in
Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri,
Oklahoma, and Texas from 24 U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers multipurpose dams with a
combined generating capacity of approximately
2,193 MW.
The development of future data requires the
forecast of revenues, expenses and investment
as detailed in DOE Order RA 6120-2.
WAPA
89,372
90,772
99
1. WAPA provides program status and
Goal 2, Strengthen the
reporting via annual reports. Status is based
Nation 's Energy
on objectives laid out in the WAPA Tactical
Security, Resiliency,
Action Plan. WAPA has a created a website
Affordability, and
(called The Source), which offers a one-stop
Reliability
shop for financial and operational
information. With the latest expansion
below, WAPA partnered with customers to
determine data elements and information
that would be most helpful to understand
cost drivers and expenditures.
2. Results are also released by quarter,
providing performance data based on
established goals. An example report is
linked here.
C-40
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
DOE
9FY21
97FY22
# of Staff
Applicable Evaluations, Studies, Research,
FY22-26 Strategic
Element
Enacted ($K),
Request ($K),
(Fed)
and Analyses
Goal(s) (DRAFT)
for DOE
for DOE
Element
Element
BACKGROUND: The Western Area Power
Administration's (WAPA) mission to market
and deliver clean, renewable, reliable, cost-
based federal hydroelectric power and related
services.
The development of future data requires the
forecast of revenues, expenses and investment
as detailed in DOE Order RA 6120-2.
C-41
DOE Program and Functional Offices Evaluation/Evidence-Building Activities, FY 2023 Evaluation Plan, Learning Agenda, and Capacity
Assessment
