U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Washington, DC 20472
DEPARTMENT
Sin FOR
FEMA
1) Executive Summary
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
February 23, 2022
Leslie Saucedo, Acting Director, Office of Equal Rights, 202-746-2708,
Leslie.Saucedo@fema.dhs.gov
Paul Judson, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Policy & Program Analysis,
(202) 213-9453, Paul.Judson@fema.dhs.gov
FEMA serves the American public by helping people before, during, and after disasters, through
its core values of respect, integrity, compassion, and fairness in its interactions with disaster
survivors, colleagues, recipients, and partners.
FEMA can enhance equity by executing a methodical, multilayered, and systematic approach to
analyzing intended and actual accessibility to and impacts for underserved andmarginalized
communities. Starting from the highest level of leadership, FEMA is integrating equity into its
strategic plan, goals and priorities, programs and activities, and foundational documents and
processes. These actions will help to achieve the following impacts:
Underserved communities can access and leverage FEMA resources in ways that
meet their needs.
Underserved communities are routinely consulted in FEMA decisions about policy
and program implementation.
FEMA and our partners have the training and tools required to advance equity in
their programs.
FEMA directs resources to eliminating disparities in outcomes.
FEMA programs routinely evaluate and address disparities in outcomes.
FEMA conducted an initial equity analysis of multiple programs across the agency, each ofwhich
has different capacity to conduct a thorough equity assessment and implement actions
www.fema.gov
to address identified barriers. The following pages summarize the barriers discovered so farfor each
program and potential actions that could be taken to address them.
2) Summary of Early Accomplishments
In April 2021, FEMA established an Equity Enterprise Steering Group (ESG) with two objectives:
(1) Create a FEMA-wide definition of equity and framework for implementing equity into
agency programs, in line with FEMA's core values: compassion, fairness, integrity,
andrespect; and
(2) Review and recommend revisions to FEMA-wide policies, procedures, plans and
guidance, in collaboration with FEMA's Enterprise Governance Boards, as
appropriate, to ensure the integration of equity considerations to drive equitable
outcomes.
The Equity ESG has announced FEMA's definition of equity: Equity is "the consistent and systematic
fair, just, and impartial treatment of all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved
communities of color, persons who belong to communities that may face discrimination based on sex,
sexual orientation, and gender identity (including members of the LGBTQ+ community); persons with
disabilities, persons who may face discrimination based on their religion, national origin and persons with
Limited English Proficiency, and persons who live in rural areas that have been systematically denied a
full opportunity to participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life." The Equity ESG also
created an equity principle: Ensuring all people are helped before, during and after disasters,
based on their specific needs. The Equity ESG is now working on its second objective of policy
review, to includea data analytics subgroup, and a strategic plan subgroup.
FEMA's Office of Equal Rights (OER) and Privacy Office are also developing a System of
Records Notice (SORN) that will allow the agency to collect demographic data of applicants
for FEMA assistance, recipients, and subrecipients who apply for financial assistance and
grants, and organizations that do business with FEMA, grants. The SORNwill allow FEMA to
collect and analyze demographic data based on the protected characteristics of the Stafford Act
(race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, English proficiency, and economic
status). The enhanced data collection will allow FEMA to accurately identify and increase
targeted resources to the underserved and marginalized communities that policies and funding
are intended to benefit. The Stafford Act and other civil rights authorities applicable to FEMA
give FEMA the abilityto advance civil rights, equity, and data collection efforts to ensure equal
access to and equitable impacts of FEMA and recipient programs and activities and better
serve underserved and marginalized communities. The ability to collect demographic data of
populations served by FEMA is imperative to achieving the intent and spirit of civil rights
laws.
To accomplish this FEMA is actively building a robust external civil rights program by
recruiting and hiring experienced civil rights subject matter experts in the OER and developing
programs to enforce and ensure compliance with civil rights laws and authorities. The OER
ensures that FEMA programs are conducted, and FEMA funding sadministered in a
nondiscriminatory manner. Also, OER processes complaints under
2
the authorities of the Stafford Act, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and other applicable civil rights laws. The OER is currently
reviewing and revising the FEMA Language Access Plan, collaborating with the Office of
External Affairs (OEA) on developing an agency-wide Community Engagement Plan, to
include enhancement of and best practices for stakeholder outreach. The OER also provides
technical assistance to FEMA program offices to help ensure thatrecipients of FEMA funding
comply with civil rights and are working towards achieving equity among targeted populations.
Additionally, FEMA is building the institutional and staff capacity to integrate equity into
policy and program delivery activities by enhancingawareness, understanding and appreciation
of the principles of civil rights compliance. Further, FEMA will develop and implement an
annual equity and civil rights assessmentagenda, building on the steps taken in developing the
Equity Action Plan.
On April 22, 2021, FEMA issued a Request for Information (RFI) to seek input from the public
on FEMA programs, regulations, collections of information, and policies for the agency to
consider modifying, streamlining, expanding, or repealing considering the recent Executive
actions. The RFI is intended to help FEMA ensure that its programs, regulations, and policies
contain necessary, properly tailored, and up-to-date requirementsthat effectively achieve
FEMA's mission in a manner that furthers the goals of advancing equity for all and bolstering
resilience from the impacts of climate change. The RFI closedon July 21, 2021, and FEMA
continues reviewing and responding to the 345 comments received. FEMA also continues
robust engagement with its National Advisory Council to request and receive feedback from the
emergency management community at large.
FEMA also regularly engages with the National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster
(National VOAD). In addition, FEMA conducted its second Civil Rights Summiton November
17, 2021, to inform and engage with members of the public regarding how FEMA can identify
actual and perceived biases impacting equal access to and equitable distribution of FEMA's
programs and services. The Civil Rights Summit also assisted FEMA in learning how to better
meet the needs of underserved and marginalized communities before, during, and after disasters.
Finally, as part of both normal operations and the equity assessments, FEMA programs are
reviewing a number of activities to enhance external engagement, including community surveys,
focus groups, mailers, and door-to-door canvassing.
On January 13, 2022, in alignment with its 2022-2026 Strategic Plan, FEMA introduced "Equity
Day." Equity Day brought the entire FEMA workforce together to understand what equity
means for the Agency and how FEMA will advance equity through the 2022-2026 FEMA
Strategic Plan. Leaders from across FEMA engaged in discussions around theAgency's ongoing
and upcoming efforts to integrate equity into the workforce, practices, and communication. The
workforce heard directly from FEMA leadership about their commitment to achieving the
objectives outlined in the Strategic Plan to cultivate a more diverse FEMA workforce, remove
barriers to FEMA programs, and achieve equitable outcomes for all those served by the agency.
3
3) Equity action plan
Action 1: Procurement: Continuing to Ensure Inclusiveness
Barriers to Equitable Outcome(s)
The Office of the Chief Component Procurement Officer (OCCPO) is bound by the
rules and regulations codified within the federal acquisition statues and regulations, as
well as agency supplementals. As such, the outreach conducted by FEMA is done in accordance
with those statues and regulations, as well as based on the experience of FEMA staff, and
consistent with the Small Business Act, which expresses very clearly the concerns eligible for
participation in set asides procured by the government for socially disadvantaged small
businesses which are generally members of underserved communities. As the Federal
Acquisition Regulation (FAR) is the governing statute forfederal procurement, any reforms to
procurement policy would need to be approved through the Office of Federal Procurement
Policy (OFPP), OCCPO is unable to make any changes to any of the Small Business programs
as currently structured.
Actions and Intended Impact on Barriers
OCCPO has processes in place intended to improve outcomes for the public that are
conducted in compliance with the FAR, which provides the procurement framework
for executive agencies. The Small Business Program directs OCCPO to set aside
certain procurements for participation by small business concerns, including women-
owned and minority businesses (WOSB), in accordance with provisions of the Small
Business Act.
OCCPO ensures the awarding of contracts to small businesses to the maximum extent
possible, while also:
Promoting the participation of all small businesses in FEMA contracts;
Developing information to ensure small businesses compete for and receive a
fairs hare of the Department's expenditures; and
Participating and hosting Vendor Outreach Sessions (VOS) to educate
vendors on how to effectively market their products and services to
FEMA.
OCCPO's Small Business Specialist works closely with the operating divisions to
ensure small businesses and other businesses represented in the Small Business
Program and provided maximum opportunities to compete for federal contracting
dollars.
OCCPO's Industry Liaison Program (ILP) works diligently with its internal and
external stakeholders to ensure we provide procurement opportunities for members of
underserved communities to access procurement opportunities to the maximum extent
practical by providing outreach, training, and other resources on how to do business
with the federal government, before, during and after disasters.
Contracting Officers, upon arrival at Joint Field Offices (JFOs), will coordinate with
the local Small Business Administration office to obtain vendor information on 8(a)
firms, as well as other businesses eligible for direct award to increase minority
business outreach and maximize small business goals.
For procurement requirements that are complex and appropriately designated for a
large business, OCCPO works with the program office to break down the complexity
to allow small business awards whenever possible.
4
Regarding outreach, while OCCPO conducts numerous outreach and awareness
events in regions, states, cities specific to socio-economic categories, there are
opportunities to increase public engagement, such as:
Publish upcoming OCCPO outreach events and activities on SAM.gov website;
Review and track progress against the items in the Industry Engagement Plan;
Collaborate with DHS and other components to share best practices and
lessons learned to maximize the value in outreach events and information
share;
Engage more organizations which focus solely on minority and under-served
communities such as Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA); and
Collect participating registrants Small Disadvantaged Business (SDB) and
economic identifiers up front for events that we facilitate.
OCCPO will continue to build on the outreach growth last year by host a minimum of
12 industry and community engagement events during the calendar year, including
webinars in all 10 FEMA regions prior to the start of hurricane season which begins on
June 1. These outreach programs include Procurement Technical Assistance Centers
(PTACs) and Minority Business Development Councils nationwide to maximize
outreach.
OCCPO is planning a series of FEMA talks, short informative videos for the vendor
community designed to maximize outreach and increase access to FEMA programs, tobe
released during Fiscal Year 2022 (FY22).
OCCPO ILP has a goal that requires the program to reach out to the minority business
councils in every region and territory under FEMA's purview to host how to do businesswith FEMA
events for those underserved communities prior to the start of the hurricane season.
OCCPO ILP reaches out to minority business councils located in the potential hurricane
impact zone and provide contracting information prior to hurricanes making landfall such as: the
most highly used services and supplies during disaster response and recovery; a list of the FEMA
Advance Contracts which are executed immediately beforeor after a disaster to help stabilize the
impact zone allowing small businesses to contact those companies and establish teaming
arrangements or subcontracting agreements; and,opportunities for those small businesses
representing the underserved communities to request a direct sit down with FEMA OCCPO.
Tracking Progress
OCCPO's data on contract awards, including small business awards and local business
awards, are readily available through OCCPOs contract reporting system, as well as
theFederal Procurement Data System, the reporting system Congress uses to track
awards.
DHS provides monthly reporting progress on meeting small business goals.
OCCPO tracks the number of outreach events by category and the total number of
participants for:
large scale events like the regional industry days which include Minority
Businesses;
targeted events include outreach pre and post hurricane landfall to engage
minority and small businesses in the impacted area; and
industry outreach as part of market research.
5
Mission Support has established a Business Excellence dashboard that tracks the
Procurement Acquisition Lead Time and Industry Engagements.
Accountability
OCCPO's Head of the Contracting Activity (HCA) and Deputy HCA meet
regularly with the Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on
Homeland Security. The Chairman consistently asks for updates on
OCCPO'sminority engagement.
The HCA has established goals for ILP to have a minimum of 12 industry
engagements annually.
FAR requires market research efforts to reflect consideration for the required sources
of supply, such as people who are blind or severely disabled and underserved
programs.
OCCPO's contract documentation ensures that all contractors are registered,
certified, and responsible to do business with the government.
The OCCPO strives to meet its Historically Underutilized Business Zones
(HUBZone) goal, one of the goals required for the agency to meet its overall small
business goals, and one that challenges the agency regularly. The HUBZone goal is
designed to help small businesses in urban and rural communities gain preferential
access to federal procurement opportunities. Awards to HUBZone increase
employment opportunities, investment, and economic development in affected
areas.
The OCCPO Small Business Specialist participates in Integrated Procurement Team
(IPT) kick-off meetings and advocates for the use of small businesses.
The OCCPO Small Business Specialist reviews and approves all Acquisition Planning
forecast System (APFS) submissions ensuring market research includes capabilities
for small businesses.
The DHS Chief Procurement Officer has an established review process, the
Procurement Strategy Roadmap, which requires an assessment of the acquisition
approach that provides rationale regarding the determination made to not set aside
requirements at $10 million dollars and above.
Mission Support has established a Business Excellence dashboard that tracks the
Procurement Acquisition Lead Time, small business goals accomplishment, and
Industry Engagements. Performance metrics have been established and are incorporated
in the HCA and DHCA's performance plans.
6
Action 2: Equity as a Foundation for Public Assistance
Barriers to Equitable Outcome(s)
As stated in the January 21, 2021, Executive Order 13995, COVID-19 has had a disproportionate
impact on communities of color and other underserved populations, including members of the
LGBTQ+ community, persons with disabilities and Limited English Proficiency, and those living
at the margins of our economy. Due to underlying health conditions and inadequate access to
testing and treatment, these communities suffer from higher rates of COVID-19 cases,
hospitalizations, and death. Thus, impacts of COVID-
19 on historically underserved and marginalized communities have been particularly devastating.
To combat this inequity, FEMA's Public Assistance (PA) Program recognizesthe important role
it plays in coordinating pandemic response and recovery that prioritizes the needs of high risk,
under-resourced communities. As such, FEMA's PA Program chose toassess equity in this area and
specifically assess request whether the additional requirementslaid out in FEMA Policy #104-21-
0004 (Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic: Medical CareEligible for Public Assistance (Interim)
(Version 2) (March 2021) led to more equitable useof assistance, should be expanded and in the
future required of other, non-vaccination, program activities.
New policies, regulations, guidance documents, communications materials, and an improved
website are necessary to advance equity and improve the accessibility of PA programs. As FEMA
continues to strive to advance equity, the PA Program will provide guidance for Recipients and
Subrecipients to identify and support traditionally underservedor marginalized communities.
Actions and Intended Impact on Barriers
FEMA has worked to magnify the impact of its existing review and technical
assistance capacity through the creation and distribution of webinars, job aids, and
other guidance documents for Recipients and Subrecipients to ensure response and
recovery efforts are conducted in an equitable manner. Additional capacity will
enable FEMA to provide more meaningful feedback and more actionable
technicalassistance to all Applicants to better ensure their disaster recovery
funding reacheshistorically underserved communities.
Moving forward, FEMA will work to clarify the Recipient's legal responsibility and
to structure a more comprehensive reporting process so that Recipients and
Subrecipients clearly understand their obligations to develop and report on their
strategies for equitable response and recovery.
FEMA is redeveloping the way it collects, documents, and processes information
from applicants to be less burdensome, more effective, and to enhance equitable
distribution of PA. FEMA is restructuring and updating the guidance for how the
Agency assigns PA Program Delivery Managers to ensure better technical
assistancefor historically underserved and vulnerable Applicants.
FEMA is assessing other areas of the PA program that could be contributing to
inequitable outcomes. In 2022, equity efforts will include consideration of
outcomeindicators.
FEMA is reviewing the outcomes of reports and the timeliness of reviews to
determine whether additional reporting requirements will be added beyond
vaccination work, and whether additional FEMA resources are needed to
7
complete reviews.
The vaccine mission is one of the most important life-saving efforts in our nation
right now. FEMA has prioritized these actions to have the most immediate,
effective, and enduring impact on improving equitable provisions of vaccines to
Americans. FEMA Applicants are now prioritizing resources to ensure an
equitable pandemic response and are demonstrating how equity was considered as
a part of the vaccine administration strategy. The reporting requirements for
Applicants on equitable vaccine administration are an opportunity to consider
equity in other response and recovery activities.
Tracking Progress
FEMA will measure the impact of the actions taken to reduce these barriers by consideringthe
timeframe necessary for review of reports and an increase the percentage of reports thatare
reviewed and returned as "acceptable" outcomes. The FEMA Policy 104-21-0004, Coronavirus
(COVID-19) Pandemic: Medical Care Eligible for Public Assistance (Interim)(Version 2) (March
2021) is only applicable to activities related to COVID-19 response andrecovery. Therefore,
Recipient and Subrecipient reporting on equitable vaccination efforts will end with the conclusion
of the vaccination mission. However, the actions FEMA is considering, such as increased capacity,
additional reporting clarifications, redeveloped information collection processes, updated technical
assistance processes, and increasing the scope of reporting beyond vaccination requirements, will
help FEMA to further reduce barriers to equitable access. Long-term success in this effort will
mean that equity is considered as part of the entire PA lifecycle, including the provision of
technical assistanceat the outset of disaster recovery, the enhancement of data-gathering processes
and responses, the prioritization of resources to build back better, and the ongoing monitoring and
evaluation of response and recovery work.
Accountability
FEMA's PA Program is communicating frequently with stakeholders and will continue to do so
through updated guidance, additional webinars, targeted feedback, and ad hoc sessions, as
necessary. FEMA is also updating the forms, processes, and online Grants Portalsystem that the
Agency uses to support Applicants to include considerations for traditionally underserved or
marginalized communities. FEMA PA is embedding equitable response andrecovery principles
into its strategic plan. FEMA recognizes the importance of building on this work and expanding
the consideration of equity into other parts of PA program implementation. To that end, the
consideration of equity was incorporated into FEMA's PADivision's 2022 senior executive and
leadership performance plans. Specific provisions include developing and implementing policy,
doctrine, information sharing, and risk management mechanisms and controls to facilitate
equitable outcomes for disaster survivors. As of January 12, 2022, FEMA is supporting over nine
hundred Applicants withCOVID-19 vaccination projects. FEMA has obligated over $6.5 Billion
for projects that include vaccination activities in fifty-four states, tribes, and territories (also known
as Recipients or Subrecipients). In addition to distributing job aids and other guidance documents,
FEMA PA has required Recipients and Subrecipients to document that pandemic response and
recovery efforts are conducted in an equitable manner and report onthe consideration of equity in
vaccine administration to FEMA every 30 days. FEMA established an email inbox for questions
related to the equitable response and recovery reporting process and has conducted multiple
webinars in English and Spanish to inform Recipients and Subrecipients of the requirements and
key reporting guidance for equitable COVID-19 response and recovery.
8
Action 3: People First: Achieving Equitable Outcomes for Disaster Survivors
Barriers Equitable Outcome(s)
IA knows that disasters have a disproportionate impact on lower income persons, families,
and communities that are historically under-resourced, underserved, and underrepresented.
IA also acknowledges that these underserved and marginalized communities are
disproportionately people and communities of color. Due to IA's commitment to excellencein
public service and dedication to creating equitable long-term disaster recovery outcomes,IA must
build more equitable outcomes, reduce administrative burdens, increase eligibility for
underserved and vulnerable applicants, increase access, and improve external messaging.
Actions and Intended Impact of Barriers
Improving External Messaging
FEMA has various methods of communicating with individuals who apply for disaster
assistance and needs to ensure assistance is being communicated in a manner that
resounds with the population we are serving. Therefore, the Individual Assistance (IA)
Program will coordinate closely with the OEA to improve and target messaging across all
aspects of Individuals and Household Program 0 (IHP program delivery to ensure
applicants have the information necessary in the method that is most helpful to them to
assist them with navigating the disaster assistance process.
FEMA's IA Program is performing a comprehensive review of the correspondence
provided to individuals who apply for disaster assistance. This review is focusedo
ensuring the correspondence is easy to read, decipher decisions made, and navigate next
steps.
Work through Recovery Support Function Leadership Group (RSFLG) and the White
House on recovery and equity to encourage action from other federal agencies.
The IA Program will ensure that individuals, including vulnerable populations, are not
experiencing administrative burden such as receiving unnecessary ineligible letters
premature to final eligibility decision.
Address any language barriers that could present administrative burden to individuals
with Limited English Proficiency.
Expand methods of ownership and occupancy verification for homeowners and rentersto
increase the potential eligibility for assistance from FEMA to include:
Re-evaluating automated third-party data matching verification for identity,
occupancy, and ownership verification decisions.
Utilizing past disaster data from FEMA's system of record within the past two years
to verify occupancy and past disaster data from any previous disaster to verify
ownership.
Issuing inspections for all IHP referrals and authorizing on-site FEMA inspectors to
view and approve occupancy and ownership verification documentation.
Expanding forms of documentation to prove ownership and occupancy.
Allow self-certification of occupancy and ownership for Mobile Homes / Travel
Trailers as a last resort.
Allow self-certification of ownership for heirship properties as a last resort.
Expanding the timeframe requirements for documents to be dated prior to the incident
9
start date for occupancy and ownership verification. Most occupancy and ownership
verification documents can now be "dated within one year prior to the disaster or within
the 18-month period of assistance."
Performing initiative-taking casework and outreach to applicants who continue to fail
ownership and occupancy.
Expand financial assistance funding for applicants to include:
Providing a limited amount of financial assistance under Other Needs Assistance (ONA)
for renters and homeowners with disaster-caused real property damage that did not
render the home uninhabitable.
Increasing the ONA-Small Business Administration (SBA) Failed Income Test (FIT)
threshold to allow more lower income applicants to receive ONA grants without first
requiring SBA loan denial.
Aiding survivors who incurred a disaster-related disability and now require special
components (such as ramps or grab bars) to make their home safe and functional for
them, regardless of whether those components were in the survivor's home before the
disaster.
Providing financial assistance to clean or repair real-property components impacted
by
disaster-caused mold growth.
Explore additional services offered by Disaster Legal Services to improve alignment
with survivor needs.
Enhancing Access
Prioritize outreach and case processing for historically underserved and vulnerable
populations to include Limited English Proficiency and access and functional needs to
improve eligibility and verification outcomes.
Focus deploying Disaster Survivor Assistance teams and opening Disaster Recovery
Centers in underserved areas to help applicants register for assistance and provide
necessary documentation to FEMA for eligibility.
Outline a strategy for the OER Cadre and Interagency Recovery Coordination to assist
with outreach to vulnerable populations and communities during disaster operations.
Tracking Progress
FEMA's IA Program has established reporting mechanisms to track completion and full
implementation of actions. The IA Program also intends to continue to work with the Recovery
Reporting and Analytics Division to apply data-informed strategies to ensure objective assessment
of equity outcomes based on these actions. These actions will be measured for each disaster to
inform whether additional applicants were made eligible by FEMA's proactive outreach and
approach and expanded documentation for occupancy and ownership and whether additional
assistance is provided based on the increased housing andother needs assistance available. This
analysis will also inform any additional actions necessary to create equitable long-term disaster
recovery outcomes focused on reducing administrative burdens and increasing eligibility for
underserved, vulnerable applicants, increase access to FEMA programs, and improve external
messaging. Identified metrics include:
Percentage occupancy verification through new documentation process.
Percentage ownership verification through new documentation process.
Additional applicants and dollars assisted through clean and sanitize assistance.
Additional applicants and dollars assisted through mold remediation assistance.
Percentage ownership verified through inspector in-person visits.
10
Percentage occupancy verified through inspector in-person visits.
Accountability
FEMA's Individual Assistance Program is communicating updates via FEMA.gov toprogram
guidance and policy as implemented and will continue to do so with any additional updates that
occur. FEMA Individual Assistance also received additional feedback throughthe RFI and is
incorporating updates based on this feedback into upcoming policy updates for the Individual
Assistance Program and Policy Guide set to be released in 2023. In alignment with Executive
Order 13985, "Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities through the
Federal Government," FEMA published a RFI to seek input from the public on FEMA programs,
regulations, and policies. Through this process, IA responded to 77 unique comments submitted via
the Agency's RFI related to equity and the IHP and already included some of the input from the
comments via the FEMAPolicy 104-009-03, Individual Assistance Program and Policy Guide
(IAPPG) (Version .1)(May 2021) and intends to include future updates to policy and regulations
based on the comments received.
As part of the correspondence review, FEMA will be facilitating focus groups with FEMA disaster
assistance applicants to gather feedback and recommendations to inform additional changes
necessary as part of this effort.
The IA Division Director is accountable for ensuring these actions are completed and outcomes
related to equity will be included in annual performance management planning. Recovery
Directorate leadership will provide oversight for these actions and will spur integration and
collaboration across Recovery for full implementation of these actions.
11
Action 4: Building Resilience
FEMA Nonprofit Security Grant Program
Barriers to Equitable Outcome(s)
The Non-Profit Security Grant Program (NSGP) provides for physical security enhancements and
other security-related activities for non-profit organizations that are at elevated risk of a terrorist
attack based on their ideology, beliefs, and/or mission. NSGP also seeks to integrate the
preparedness activities of nonprofit organizations with broader state andlocal preparedness efforts.
FEMA is reviewing NSGP's current structure to identify and reduce or remove barriers to
participation from organizations in or serving underserved communities and to promote equitable
processes and outcomes to program participants.
Actions and Intended Impact on Barriers
FEMA will identify opportunities to diversify the populations of applicants. As a
result, the program will more effectively address the security needs of
underservedand marginalized communities.
FEMA will address barriers to NSGP program participation, including application,
eligibility, and qualification requirements, where allowed by statute, and will review
intended versus actual outputs and outcomes.
FEMA will conduct a thorough review of the evaluation criteria used at both the
state and federal levels to identify criteria that could be added or deleted to achieve
more equitable outcomes during the application review process.
In addition, FEMA will conduct a comparative analysis of intended versus actual
NSGP outcomes to better understand where grant outcomes meet or fail to meet
program objectives.
FEMA will meet with current NSGP grant recipients and subrecipients, as well as
relevant community, civil rights, and faith-based organizations, to solicit comments
regarding the application and award processes, discuss barriers to participation, and
identify additional concerns and recommendations to enhance NSGP.
FEMA will review other FEMA-managed grant programs for best practices on
advancing equity goals. This review will include an assessment of evaluation criteria
and data that may assist the agency in identifying underserved and marginalized
communities.
FEMA will review the processes used by various State Administrative Agencies
(SAAs) to communicate NSGP program availability and requirements to the
nonprofit community, the application review processes conducted at the state level,
and any resultant barriers to participation.
Tracking Progress
To better identify barriers to NSGP participation, FEMA will conduct a GIS analysis to identify
where project requests initiate, and which localities are not represented. Further, ananalysis of
relevant Census tract data will be conducted. NSGP will also conduct an evaluation of why NSGP
project requests, investment justifications, and applications have not been forwarded to FEMA by
an SAA or whether technological or other barriers prevent or discourage organizations from
participating. This GIS evaluation could reveal whether specific communities or geographic
locations are under-represented in the NSGP program. This evaluation also will inform deliberate
12
outreach efforts targeting underserved or marginalized communities to encourage and facilitate
program participation.
Accountability
While FEMA has identified actionable steps to reduce barriers to NSGP for underserved
communities, a detailed plan will be created to ensure staff can conduct all equity maximizing
actions. FEMA announced the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 NSGP awards in July 2021 and has issued
those awards to the SAAs, who will pass the funding through to the non-profit organizations
approved by the Secretary of Homeland Security. As part of the FY 2022 process and moving
forward, FEMA is working with the DHS Office of the Secretaryand the Office for Civil Rights
and Civil Liberties (CRCL) to consider how to increase the amount of funding provided to
underserved communities, identify and remove barriers to participation, and improve the
program's accessibility to all communities. These efforts are informing changes to the program
that will be reflected in future Notices of FundingOpportunity funding opportunities (NOFOs).
Jointly, FEMA and CRCL conducted a review of applications submitted from underserved
communities to determine their funding potential.
FEMA Hazard Mitigation Assistance (HMA) Program
Barriers to Equitable Outcome(s)
FEMA HMA Programs provide funding before, during, and after disasters and fund risk
Reduction projects to state, local, tribal, and territorial (SLTT) governments, which provide a
tremendous opportunity to address mitigation and resilience needs. By law, some HMA programs,
such as the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP), allow the state/tribe/territory the discretion
to determine how they will fund mitigation projectsaligned with priorities identified by FEMA-
approved Hazard Mitigation Plans. Other HMA grant programs, Building Resilient Infrastructure
and Communities (BRIC) and Flood Mitigation Assistance (FMA), are competitive, and FEMA
establishes criteria for the selection and funding of mitigation projects. Federal law requires a non-
federal cost share that the President has no authority to waive, which is typically 25%. This
requirementcan be a barrier to underserved and under-resourced communities applying for hazard
mitigation grants.
With the increasing severity and frequency of disasters and their disproportionate impact on
underserved communities, it is essential to identify mitigation opportunities to help build SLTT
capability and capacity to address the impacts of climate change. Specifically, manyunderserved
communities are unable to undertake mitigation planning - a requirement for HMA grant funding
and project development/management to make mitigation investments due to lack of capability.
FEMA understands the barrier to undertake mitigation planning to be two-fold: 1) underserved
communities may lack sufficient capacity to complete a Hazard Mitigation Plan,as evidenced by
feedback received from FEMA's Request for Information on Climate and Equity and 2) FEMA's
planning policies for state, local and tribal hazard mitigation plans, which outline the criteria for
FEMA approval, have never required that equity be considered.
NOAA's recently published report continues to reiterate that there is an increase in large- scale
disasters resulting in over one billion dollars of damage. These damages largely take place in
underserved communities. FEMA recognizes the value in addressing any barriers tosupporting
underserved communities in resilient rebuilding.
13
Intended Impact on Barriers
The Administration's Justice40 Initiative is an opportunity to help address these challenges. The
Justice40 Initiative sets a goal that 40 percent of the overall benefits of investments flow to
underserved communities. HMA's BRIC and FMA programs are participating as pilot program as
part of the Justice40 Initiative.
FEMA views this EO equity assessment, together with the Administration's Justice40 Initiative,
as a major opportunity to deliberately and comprehensively assess our programs and advance our
efforts to direct program benefits to underserved communities. The Justice40 Initiative sets a goal
that 40 percent of the overall benefits of investments flow to underserved communities. HMA's
BRIC and FMA programs are participating as pilot programs as part of the Justice40 Initiative. As
pilot programs, the programs developed a robust and intentional outreach plan to try and reach
more disadvantaged communities to increase access to our programs as well as an implementation
plan for how to increase program benefits to these communities. Identifying where our funding is
going through comprehensive data analysis (e.g., who is benefitting) starting with our Justice40
programs,and prioritizing outreach and technical assistance to underserved communities are two
of HMA's biggest priorities for this coming year. FEMA is committed to data transparency andwill
continue to make data on funding available through OpenFEMA on www.fema.gov. Inaddition to
equitably funding mitigation projects, HMA is working to increase SLTT capability and capacity
through the following actions.
Data:
Measure equitable outcomes, in alignment with Justice40.
Coordinate with other federal agencies such as the EPA and HUD, as well as across
FEMA programs (e.g., Public Assistance, Hazard Mitigation Planning) to use data to
identify mitigation activities that have broader and more far-reaching impacts.
Program Design:
Collaborate with FEMA's Hazard Mitigation Planning Program to ensure plans
focus on advancing equity and incorporate climate change considerations to better
align plans with mitigation project scoping in the future.
Conduct best practice research and gather feedback from stakeholders to
improve the equitable outcomes of HMA programs.
Use an equity lens to amend evaluation criteria for Building Resilient Infrastructure
and Communities (BRIC) and Flood Mitigation Assistance (FMA) in future notices
of funding opportunities (NOFOs).
Implement a pilot for the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program, during
implementation of funding recently authorized for COVID-19 declarations, to test
how partnerships with private nonprofits, NGOs and philanthropic organizations
can provide the non-federal match and ease the financial burden on underserved
communities.
Advance the FMA initiative, including funding received under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law,
that will provide a 90 percent cost share for certain properties.
14
Outreach and Engagement:
Develop more accessible and targeted outreach methods to reach underserved
communities that may not have access to digital resources so that communities
canmore accurately develop and submit projects to reduce risk.
Conduct outreach and engagement with underserved communities and leverage
partnerships with organizations to understand specific needs and concerns and
increase access to and awareness of mitigation planning and grant opportunities.
Connect funders and practitioners to leverage program opportunities like the
BRIC non-financial Direct Technical Assistance (DTA) to improve the overall
capability of communities that need the assistance.
Host the 2022 Hazard Mitigation Partners Virtual Workshop with the theme of
Building Whole Community Resilience: Partnerships, Capability, and Capacity,
providing a platform to engage with a large number of our mitigation partners on
topics such as future conditions and climate change adaptation, nature-based
solutions, equity in hazard mitigation planning and projects, building codes and
standards, and capacity and capability building.
Tracking Progress
Multi-pronged assessment approach - 1) use data analysis to set program metrics
and determine baseline; 2) explore contextual and procedural inequities impacting
application through research; 3) evaluate existing approaches, such as DTA; and
4) conduct external engagements to better understand the needs of underserved
communities.
Identify and prioritize hazard mitigation projects in underserved communities and
increase investment to these communities who are more vulnerable to disasters.
Identify equity indicators that could be tracked over time and use the identified
indicators to provide a current baseline to describe the equity landscape. The
methodsused to do this will include interviewing data informants; researching peer
jurisdictions and practitioners; gathering and analyzing data; and vetting the
determinant indicators and data within their HMA programs.
Accountability
FEMA will modify its program to reach a broader cross-section of communities. Prior stakeholder
engagement and the examination of the BRIC DTA efforts will guide further exploration of the
challenges communities face when applying for, administering, and implementing HMA's
programs.
FEMA will continue to seek input from both internal and external stakeholders to evaluatethe
outcomes of the actions outlined in the Equity Action Plan. Through iterative feedback
gathering, FEMA will pursue course corrections and program
improvements to ensure the equitable distribution of HMA funds.
FEMA will strive toward its target for equitable outcomes:
Access equity - increase the number of successful applicants benefitting underserved
communities; streamline program requirements that meet more communities where
they are in terms of capability and capacity; additional outreach and engagement
15
efforts to reach underserved communities; assistance centered on stakeholder needs
(e.g., grants management capacity; multi-modal/multi-medium materials). FEMA is
considering opportunities to promote or provide full-life cycle resources that could
help a community from activity development through activity implementation.
Distributional equity - as part of the Justice40 initiative, the BRIC and FMA programs
will work toward a goal of 40% of the benefits being directed to disadvantaged
communities (as defined in the Justice40 Interim Guidance); through HMA technical
assistance or financial assistance, improved community capacity to develop and implement
successful mitigation activities.
Partnerships - improved coordination across agencies and more robust
partnerships with nonemergency management organizations that support
underserved communities to drive equitable outcomes.
FEMA National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
Barriers to Equitable Outcome(s)
Several million low incomes households live in high flood risk special flood hazard areas (SFHA).
Through previous research, the NFIP has determined that roughly 26% of current policyholders in
the SFHA meet HUD low-income definitions and 51% ofnon-policyholdersin the SFHA meet HUD
low-income definitions. Outside the SFHA, roughly 21% of currentpolicyholders meet HUD low-
income definitions, and 41% of non-policyholders meet HUDlow-income definitions.
Flood insurance is statutorily required to be rated based on risk-its price is not based on a
policyholder's ability to pay. This leaves an insurance gap for some households: those who
cannot afford flood insurance and are at risk of flooding. These households will not have the
resources available to them after a flood to rebuild and replace damaged property and
possessions. The NFIP can close the insurance gap and increase financial resilience for flood-
prone, low-income households by developing a flood insurance affordability program.
Actions and Intended Impact on Barriers
The NFIP spent five years in evidence-based policymaking to develop its
proposed affordability program. The NFIP engaged the broader policy
community, including academia and other government agencies, to develop an
affordability framework. TheNFIP has reviewed the affordability framework,
academic research, and previous legislative attempts to solve the challenge of
flood insurance affordability.
If the NFIP's legislative proposal is passed, the NFIP will conduct a marketing
andoutreach effort to reach underserved populations.
The NFIP will also analyze publicly available datasets to develop
additional statistically validated data points related to the NFIP's current
policy base andpotential policyholders.
The NFIP will increase stakeholder engagement to strengthen the NFIP
external advocacy by reaching out to private sector insurance companies and
other relevantorganizations.
The NFIP will address flood insurance affordability challenges by:
Leveraging planned work by the Office of the Flood Insurance Advocate
inunderserved communities.
16
Providing legislative language to OMB and technical drafting assistance to
congressional offices pertaining to building a flood insurance affordability
program.
Continuing to publicly promote the challenge of flood insurance affordability.
Working with the Individual Assistance program to identify previous
disaster assistance recipients who may qualify for affordability
assistance.
Tracking Progress
While the NFIP does not currently collect any demographic data related to flood insurance
policyholders, the NFIP will begin collection of needed data. In the past, the NFIP coordinated
with the Census Bureau to produce the Flood Insurance Affordability Framework, where the
NFIP matched Census micro data with flood insurance policy data todevelop analyses and
aggregate statistics. If the NFIP's flood insurance affordability legislative proposal is enacted
into law, the NFIP will collect income information from policyholders and potential
policyholders to implement the program. Success will be measured as the insurance gap is
decreased. In the long term, the NFIP will use outcome-based metrics to demonstrate progress
includedecisions made that address cumulative impacts on quantifiable flood resiliency and
underserved communities.
Accountability
Because flood insurance is statutorily required to be rated based on risk, the NFIP can do little
to meaningfully close the insurance gap and increase financial resilience for low-income flood
disaster survivors without a flood insurance affordability program. In the meantime, the NFIP
can conduct marketing and outreach to inform underserved populations about their flood risk,
but low-income households will still face a barrier to entry in the program because they cannot
afford the flood insurance.
17
