GSA
U.S. General Services Administration
U.S. General Services Administration
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
April 4, 2022
1
Table of Contents
Introduction
3
Evaluation Topic 1.1: Remote employee resources
6
Evaluation Topic 1.2: Demand for Federal real property
9
Learning Question 2: Acquisition
12
Evaluation Topic 2.1: Reducing administrative barriers
13
Learning Question 3: Digital Government
15
Learning Question 4: Government Operation
17
Evaluation Topic 4.1: Greening of the fleet
19
2
Introduction
The U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) is committed to ensuring a strong
culture of evaluation, evidence-building, and learning. GSA's Learning Agenda and
Annual Evaluation Plans set a series of agencywide learning targets in alignment with
GSA's strategic objectives and in collaboration with varied offices across GSA.
GSA's Annual Evaluation Plan (AEP) is a set of priority evaluations that build on the GSA
Learning Agenda. The AEP will support progress on the Learning Agenda; however,
these efforts will also have additional and independent workstreams and thus not fully
overlap. GSA will also continue planning these proposed efforts for FY 23 as more
information becomes available on program implementation.
In developing the AEP, GSA engaged internal and external stakeholders. Internally this
included key stakeholders from across the agency, as they advised and helped develop
questions for inclusion in the AEP. Externally this included hearing insights shared by the
Office of Management and Budget partners in the budget, performance, and evidence
teams. GSA's Evaluation Officer (EO) worked closely with varied stakeholders with
expertise in the program areas to ensure that the AEP is relevant, realistic, and
meaningful. The EO convened an Evaluation Working Group to provide input into the
criteria¹ to select priority² evaluations, review and rank potential evaluations against these
criteria, and provide input into the final set of priority evaluations to comprise the AEP.
Given GSA's current capacity to support evaluation, there are some policy areas that are
not included in the FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan. GSA strategically decided to
continue prioritizing many of the learning activities started in FY 2022. Other priorities will
be included in future Annual Evaluation Plans as GSA's evaluation capacity grows and
we complete the cycle of ongoing, multi-year learning objectives. And new activities may
be added off cycle, as needed and feasible.
GSA's FY 2023 AEP includes five priority evaluation topics, on varied policy and
operational areas. These topics include:
What resources are most important for supporting employees and teams in a
remote work environment?
What, if any, impact would increased reliance on flexible work policies have on the
demand for Federal real property?
1
Criteria for determining priority evaluation: mandate, link to Learning Agenda, strategic priority, large
program, external recommendation, administrator, administration, or OMB priority, priority evidence gap,
feasibility.
2
GSA uses the term "priority" as a proxy for "significant".
3
What acquisition program or policy changes can address and reduce
administrative barriers for GSA customers, especially those that have a
disproportionate impact on underserved communities?
What programs or policies are effective at promoting greening of the fleet, including
use of electric or other zero-emission vehicles?
What strategies and technologies are most effective to efficiently operate and
maintain Federal facilities and reduce adverse climate impacts from operations or
from severe weather events?
Each priority evaluation topic includes a description of the case for evaluation, notes on
possible evaluation approaches, methods and key data, anticipated challenges and
solutions, and initial notes on dissemination of results.
4
Learning Question 1: Real Estate Solutions
What technologies and solutions does the Federal workforce need to
work effectively in a more responsive remote work setting?
Context
GSA is leading the Workplace 2030 (WP2030) initiative studying agencies' space usage
during and before the COVID-19 pandemic and discussing evolving needs, which will
drive long-term workspace solutions and decisions. Building on our FY 2021 progress,
GSA will proactively and regularly engage customers to understand the changing mission
needs and guide their workspace strategies based on their evolving needs. GSA will
develop and deploy customer-driven solutions beginning in FY 2022, which will enable
agencies to align people, processes, and tools. GSA will also continually monitor and
quantify variables like space utilization and changing demand, which will enable GSA and
agencies to make data-driven decisions. This initiative is critical to GSA's efforts to right-
size the Federal real estate footprint. Our work will examine the effects of distributed,
virtual, and asynchronous work, rapid adaptations in information technology, and changes
to interior space planning and building operations.
The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic has reshaped how the Federal government works, and
likely will continue to do so as agencies navigate re-entry into offices. GSA has developed
categorizations for all positions-remote eligible, on-site flexible, and on-site required-
and is planning for a significant proportion of its workforce to engage in a higher level of
remote work than prior to the pandemic. Navigating the new reality of an increasingly
hybrid future of work presents significant opportunities to understand how GSA can best
support employees both when they are working remotely and working from an office.
Evaluation Topic 1.2 focuses on learning how best to support employees when they are
working remotely. Evaluation Topic 1.2 focuses on how GSA can best support on-site
staff.
Strategic Objective
Develop and offer integrated space and virtual workspace options and services that
maximize flexibility, particularly in anticipation of increased telework.
5
Evaluation Topic 1.1: Remote employee resources
What resources are most important for supporting employees and
teams in a remote work environment?
Overview
GSA is planning evaluations to understand more about how providing office equipment
to employees in remote locations can help to improve employee and agency outcomes.
These pilot evaluations initially will be housed at GSA, but if the pilots go well, GSA may
provide offerings to other Federal agencies in FY 2023 or later.
A WP2030 initiative called "Home Office in a Box" will be rolled out initially in late FY 2022.
An implementation analysis focusing on initial use will be completed in early FY 2023.
GSA evaluation leads will work with the Workplace 2030 team to assess the feasibility of
embedding evaluation in either a larger rollout of remote equipment offerings, or on future
iterations of the user experience.
GSA will continue to engage with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and other
Federal agencies to understand where there are opportunities to learn from the re-entry
period. While it is expected that by FY 2023 employees will have reached an equilibrium
in terms of work location, there will continue to be possibilities for learning about tools and
resources to better meet the needs of individual employees, teams, and managers.
Evaluation Questions
Does the provisioning of home office equipment to GSA employees (e.g., chairs,
monitors, keyboards, and mice) increase employee engagement, satisfaction,
health, and productivity?
How will the return to facilities impact GSA employee engagement, satisfaction,
health, and productivity?
To what extent do team structures (e.g., all remote, hybrid, all in the office)
affect individual outcomes (including equity), team outcomes, and agency
outcomes?
How do other, non-equipment support resources increase GSA employee and
team engagement, satisfaction, and productivity?
Evaluation Approach and Timeline
Evaluation of Home Office in a Box: a pilot of core Home Office in a Box
functionality is planned for Q3/Q4 FY 2022 and will be made available to a group
6
of GSA employees. GSA evaluation leads are working with the project team to
assess the feasibility of embedding an impact evaluation in the first-stage rollout
of the program. Early implementation analysis is tentatively planned for late
FY 2022 and extending to early FY 2023.
The results of the Home Office in a Box pilot³ will inform larger Federal service
offerings. Scaling up remote service offerings will present an opportunity to build
in evaluation, for example with a staggered rollout. The Home Office in a Box pilot
will also allow for refining a theory of change to help understand the effects of
scaling up even if a rigorous impact evaluation is not possible. If Home Office in a
Box proves successful, a rollout to other agencies could begin in late FY 2022 or
early FY 2023. GSA evaluation leads will work with PBS to embed evaluation in a
wider rollout where possible, possibly with quasi-experimental methods.
Evaluation of re-entry pilots: GSA is coordinating with OPM to plan for ongoing
evaluations of the effects of additional remote and hybrid work offerings on
recruitment, retention, and advancement of employees. In FY 2023 there will be
opportunities for continuing evaluation, for example of different training products
for managers of remote and hybrid teams or evaluating the effects of remote and
hybrid positions on recruitment. Where there are different options for use of new
service offerings, it may be possible to embed randomized control trials.
FY 2022
FY 2023
FY 2024
FY 2025
Evaluation Activity
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Evaluation of Home Office in a Box
Evaluation of scaling remote equipment
service offerings
Evaluation of re-entry pilots
Key Data and Information
Key data and information to support the evaluations outlined in Evaluation Topic 1.1 may
include:
User experience research to provide feedback on website design, product
offerings, use cases for Home Office in a Box;
Customer satisfaction surveys given to people who engage with the Home Office
in a Box website, and targeted interviews with users;
Purchase data from GSA Advantage can inform who purchases which products-
if possible, these data could be joined to human resources data to understand
3 In this document "pilot" refers to the small-scale introduction of a new policy, process, or service offering
and is not an evaluation activity or method.
7
more about equity in the program but would be either limited to GSA employees
who participate or would require other agencies to share data;
Google Digital Analytics Program data on website interactions to understand
potential pain points;
GSA employee daily check in data to understand patterns of remote and in-office
work during the re-entry period and beyond.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Measurement of employee outcomes is difficult. While it is possible to observe some
outcomes related to recruitment, retention, and advancement, it is not currently possible
to link measures of employee engagement and productivity to individuals. New data
collections are likely necessary to collect adequate data to assess the effectiveness of
remote work resources. Even still, it may be difficult to measure some concepts like
overall productivity and employee efficiency for knowledge-based duties that do not lend
themselves to easy methods of counting.
A second challenge is related to causal identification and likely selection issues. It is likely
that some amount of employee choice will be allowed that will sort employees into those
that for whatever reason are more inclined to work remotely or in the office. Simple
comparisons of employees in different environments are likely to be biased.
Evidence Use and Dissemination
Early evidence from an initial pilot of Home Office in a Box will inform adjustments
to the service offering, with the ultimate goal to refine the program into a
governmentwide offering.
Evaluation of other remote work resources will build into a cycle of continuous
improvement that assesses effectiveness of different options, updates service
offerings in response to the evidence, and plans a new cycle of evaluation.
Evaluations from FY 2023 re-entry pilots focused on the agency transition from
maximum telework to a hybrid environment will continue with intermediate- and
long-term outcome evaluation. These evaluations can help inform both whether
telework policies should be updated to encourage different remote work choices
versus in-office work choices.
8
Evaluation Topic 1.2: Demand for Federal real property
What, if any, impact would increased reliance on flexible work policies
have on the demand for Federal real property?
Overview
Even before, and now accelerated by, the COVID-19 pandemic, the workspace allocated
per person is decreasing. The pandemic has demonstrated that telework is a viable option
and that the future will include a mix of office-based work and telework. This presents a
unique opportunity to restructure GSA's real property portfolio.
GSA will proactively and regularly engage customers to understand the changing mission
needs and guide their workspace strategies based on their evolving needs. Beginning in
FY 2022, GSA will develop and deploy customer-driven solutions, which will enable
agencies to align people, processes, and tools. GSA will also continually monitor and
quantify variables like space utilization and changing demand, which will enable GSA and
agencies to make data-driven decisions. Evaluation Topic 1.2 focuses on these activities
as a key component to right sizing the GSA's Federal real estate footprint.
GSA is leading the WP2030 initiative studying agencies' space use and discussing
evolving needs, which will drive long-term workspace solutions. Through this effort, GSA
has identified existing service offerings to expand, as well as new service offerings to
provide, all of which are designed to strengthen Federal Government future workplace
practices. Our work will examine the effects of distributed, virtual, and asynchronous
work, rapid adaptations in information technology, and changes to interior space planning
and building operations.
Evaluation Questions
What features of new, adaptive workspace solutions satisfy customer needs and
real estate demands in the short and medium term?
What is the demand for PBS to provide novel real property services (for example,
flexible, multi-office spaces), and how will that demand influence holding and
reinvestment strategies for real property so that assets retained are viable and
sustainable?
How are space requirements changing in terms of needed space and use of space
in a more flexible work environment?
9
Evaluation Approach and Timeline
The Flex Hub concept provides a multi-agency, multi-functional office space that
supplies a tailored set of resources to support different work styles
(e.g., collaborative and contemplative) and needs (e.g., special-use resources like
large format printers). A descriptive study and formative evaluation of the Flex Hub
in FY 2022 will help GSA understand if the model can be scaled to additional
locations. As additional locations are added, GSA will work with partner agencies
to gather data that can potentially support outcome evaluation related not only to
employee engagement but also on space requirements and financial implications.
A descriptive study of space requirements data in FY 2022 will help to inform
possible changes to tools used by agencies when determining space and use
requirements. GSA evaluation leads will work with PBS to test the effectiveness of
any changes to PBS tools, likely starting with formative evaluation methods.
FY 2022
FY 2023
FY 2024
FY 2025
Evaluation Activity
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Descriptive study and/or formative evaluation
of office utilization applications
Outcome or impact evaluation of Flex Hub
concept
Evaluation of space requirement tools
Key Data and Information
Key data and information to support Evaluation Topic 1.2 could include:
User experience research to provide feedback on potential real property service
offerings;
New survey instruments to understand work preferences and needs distributed to
GSA employees;
Project planning data to understand other agencies' project space needs;
Qualitative feedback on people's interaction with space in the first Flex Hub
location;
Occupancy (e.g., turnstile, daily check in survey, room reservation system) data to
understand building usage.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Both the Flex Hub model and potential changes to PBS tools likely will rely on a small
number of buildings to test the concepts-one building is planned as a pilot location for
Flex Hub, and two GSA regions will serve as the test beds for new space requirement
tools. As such, inferences of how well the concepts are working will not be able to rely on
10
statistical methods that rely on large sample inference and will need to make use of both
quantitative and qualitative data paired with strong theoretical models (e.g., theory of
change) to generate rigorous evidence. For example, an outcome evaluation of a one-
location pilot of Flex Hub could achieve success if employee's intended uses of the space
are met and there is sufficient demand to justify GSA's investment. These outcomes could
include using building occupancy data and reservation application data to understand the
extent to which resources are being utilized and survey data to understand employee
perception of how well the space is facilitating intended uses. These are examples of
outcome and/or implementation evaluations which can provide valuable learning even
though there is only one location selected for the initial Flex Hub pilot.
Learning from a pilot in a single building and among a specific group of employees likely
creates some limitations to the generalizability of what is learned. The learning will be
strengthened to the extent that evaluations can seek out both common-use cases and
specific-edge cases of interest.
Evidence Use and Dissemination
GSA sees an opportunity to offer an integrated Federal real estate strategy, based on
nearly two years of Federal employees working from home and in Federal buildings under
GSA's jurisdiction, custody, or control during the COVID-19 pandemic. The evidence
generated from these early-stage efforts will help to inform choices on a different set of
space service offerings from GSA. For example, GSA will use this evidence to evolve and
expand workspace solutions for agencies, including the development and deployment of
an integrated set of services that blend real estate, people, and information technology.
GSA will use this evidence to further partner with agencies to validate and expand
solutions that meet customers' needs, including using a mix of on-site and remote work.
Finally, this evidence will be used to develop and deploy the means to track space
utilization so that agencies may make data-driven decisions about their future space
needs.
11
Learning Question 2: Acquisition
What strategies are most effective at increasing participation in
procurement and contracting opportunities for underserved
communities and small businesses?
Context
While GSA has always been strong in industry engagement, it recognizes the need to
grow and expand post-award support for new contractors, especially small and
disadvantaged businesses (SDBs), under its multiple-award vehicles. GSA will work with
industry to develop a more robust post-award strategy to help interested contractors
understand expectations, identify resources, and explore opportunities for success. GSA
will coordinate with the Small Business Administration (SBA) where there are
opportunities for SBA to support learning objectives.
GSA concluded it can best support the Administration's equity objectives by putting
greater emphasis on means to increase equity within its governmentwide acquisitions
vehicles such as the Federal Supply Schedule (FSS), governmentwide Acquisition
Contracts (GWACs), and other governmentwide multiple-award contracts such as One
Acquisition Solution for Integrated Services (OASIS) and OASIS Small Business (OASIS
SB).
Strategic Objective
Aid U.S. economic growth by maximizing opportunities and minimizing barriers for small
and/or underserved businesses seeking to do business with GSA.
12
Evaluation Topic 2.1: Reducing administrative barriers
What acquisition program or policy changes can address and reduce
administrative barriers for GSA customers, especially those that have
a disproportionate impact on underserved communities?
Overview
GSA selected the Multiple Awards Schedule (MAS) program as the initial focus of our
equity assessment. The MAS program has a long history serving as the entryway for
SDBs to the public sector marketplace. The MAS program-as the government's largest
commercial acquisition vehicle program-contains approximately 12,000 small
businesses, of which over 5,000 are disadvantaged. The MAS program contains unique
features that make it the entryway point, such as continuously open to add new small
businesses, small business teaming, socio-economic set-asides, access to free eTools,
ability to sell to State and local governments under certain authorities, education and
outreach support and ability to grow in size while holding a single 20-year contract
spanning all commercial categories of spend. The MAS program has outperformed the
governmentwide small business and socio-economic goals.
Evaluation Questions
Which aspects of the MAS process are most important for improving small
disadvantaged business performance on MAS?
What characteristics of small businesses are related to successfully being awarded
contracts?
What services are most effective at supporting SDBs that struggle to win
contracts when they are on Schedule?
How can processes for small business certification be improved?
Case for Evaluation
As part of its equity analysis for Executive Order 13985 (Advancing Racial Equity and
Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government), GSA
assessed its FSS, GWACs, and other governmentwide multiple award contracts such as
OASIS and OASIS SB. GSA found that although underserved businesses fared better in
winning GSA business than they did governmentwide, too many were not able to win task
or delivery orders. Initially, GSA will focus on the MAS and improving equity outcomes for
SDBs in the MAS to support the new 15-percent target for SDBs.
13
Evaluation Approach and Timeline
Foundational fact-finding and descriptive studies of the MAS program in FY 2022
will identify key bottlenecks where SDBs struggle in the contracting process. FY
2023 will be focused on designing interventions to reduce the identified barriers
and test the interventions with impact evaluation where possible.
FY 2022
FY 2023
FY 2024
FY 2025
Evaluation Activity
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Impact evaluation of MAS process changes to
improve SDB outcomes
Key Data and Information
Key data and information that will inform Evaluation Topic 2.1 could include:
User research to inform supplier pain points and bottlenecks during the pre-award
and post-award phases;
Analysis of supplier administrative data to track number of number of awards and
obligation, time spent in different parts of the process, bid success rates, etc.;
Website analytics to understand user experience and website interactions;
Other qualitative data collection activities to understand the overall supplier
experience.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
While there is high-quality administrative data available to identify which businesses are
more and less likely to win contracts, this data may not capture the reason why some
businesses struggle. Collecting additional data may require the approval of additional
information collections and using additional qualitative methods for understanding
customer journeys. The GSA Office of Customer Experience and staff in the Federal
Acquisition Service have the capacity to support these efforts to better diagnose
procedural bottlenecks.
Evidence Use and Dissemination
Evidence generated from multiple contracting processes-both those designed to help
small businesses get certified or on Schedule and those designed to help businesses
ultimately win contracts-may reveal some common themes. By working both internally
with GSA and externally with SBA, the pilots could create multi-agency solutions, for
example, GSA may be able to refer SDBs to new programs identified in SBA pilots.
14
Learning Question 3: Digital Government
How can GSA Technology solutions support effective service delivery
to the public?
Context
The GSA Technology Transformation Services (TTS) strives for a digital government that
delivers for the public through trusted, accessible, and user-centered technologies. TTS
helps agencies make their services more accessible, efficient, and effective with modern
applications, platforms, processes, personnel, and software solutions and to empower
the public with better access to Government information and resources. With a focus on
unifying, improving, and standardizing the experience the public has while interacting with
the Federal Government, TTS has a number of digital platforms it has developed.
Evidence on how to best leverage these solutions, improve and expand the solutions and
meet customer and public needs will be in direct service to GSA's Learning Agenda.
For example, TTS leads login.gov, USAGOV and US Web Design Systems. Login.gov
offers users simple, secure access to online Government services. Users will be able to
sign in with a single set of credentials for all participating government programs. USAGov
connects people with government information more than 700 million times a year through
its websites (USA.gov and USAGov en español), social media, publications, email, and
phone calls to the USAGov Contact Center. And the U.S. Web Design System (USWDS)
makes it easier to build accessible, mobile-friendly Government websites for the
American public. Given the reach and scale of TTS offerings, further evidence on how to
best leverage these services to better serve the public will be key in assisting GSA in
delivering on its mission.
Strategic Objective
Implement inclusive, accessible, and equitable design practices that improve customer
experience with technology and digital platforms.
Evaluation Approach and Timeline
Evaluations in FY 2023 will depend on learning from foundational fact-finding in FY 2022.
These evaluations will be updated as those efforts progress. Potential areas of interest
include:
15
Using descriptive studies of targeted public-facing websites to identify drop-off
points for interactions and testing program improvements to increase utilization
and/or accessibility of public-facing websites.
Conducting formative evaluation of website changes to increase access and
usability. For example, current efforts to better understand equity concerns of
identity verification through login. gov could lead to trialing improvements on a small
scale to see if they solve fundamental issues.
Understanding the effects of digitizing Federal forms on access and data integrity
by embedding impact evaluation.
Using descriptive studies and outcome evaluation to understand how vote. gov can
improve access to voter information and registrations for underserved
communities.
FY 2022
FY 2023
FY 2024
FY 2025
Evaluation Activity
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Descriptive study of targeted public-facing
websites
Formative evaluation of website changes to
increase access and usability.
Evaluation of the effects of digitizing Federal
forms
Key Data and Information
Key data and information that will inform Evaluation Topic 3.1 could include:
Website accessibility scans (and related metrics);
Website analytics through Google Digital Analytics Program to understand how
users travel through the digital ecosystem and identify possible areas for further
investigation;
Potentially creating novel measurement strategies to better understand
accessibility through the lens of task completion;
Surveys to assess knowledge of website manager and coordinators;
User research to understand challenges to complete tasks related to high-priority
websites.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Measurement of reach and impact on the public, resulting from TTS services and
offerings, will continue to pose a challenge when developing evidence moving forward.
Data on user outcomes on a broad scale are not consistently collected currently and will
require significant effort and resources to capture reliably. Further complicating these
16
efforts, such user outcomes are often one or more degrees separated from the user's
contact with TTS. As GSA explores promising modifications to programs and platforms
with potential to enhance impact, statutory requirements may pose some limitations
inhibiting the range of possible modifications. Further, embedding evaluation into TTS
offerings and outreach may require changes in terms of client engagement and
operations, adding additional complexity and requiring additional capacity.
Evidence Use and Dissemination
Foundational fact-finding activities in FY 2022 will be used to target at least one priority
evaluation in FY 2023, and GSA evaluation leads will work with TTS to outline additional
evaluation activities in FYs 2024 and 2025.
17
Learning Question 4: Government Operations
What GSA programs and policies are effective at improving climate
adaptation, resilience, and mitigation?
Context
The Office of Government-wide Policy's (OGP) mission is to provide innovative solutions
for the future of Government. OGP helps agency partners prepare for the future of mission
delivery by leveraging smart policy, analytical data, and dynamic program implementation
across Government. OGP aims to be the trusted partner leading to better Government
with improved citizen experiences and savings. One key aspect of this is prioritizing an
understanding of climate change risks and opportunities.
This effort supports OGP's overall mission by modeling how we build and use evidence
to improve internal operations and inform policy guidance across the Government.
Progress will require continuing to improve the use of data for decision-making and
accountability for the Federal Government, including for policymaking, innovation,
oversight, and learning. OGP will use the best available science-based climate data and
develop and use new data sources and tools to better inform decision making, including
through risk-informed processes to identify its vulnerability to climate disruptions. High
quality data will allow us to run rapid, low-cost tests and identify effective policy changes,
and we will identify, prioritize, and make progress on data gaps.
In formulating policy, OGP will work to advance equitable distribution of environmental
risks and benefits and to avoid actions that may lead to increased risk of adverse climate-
related outcomes, increased vulnerability to climate change, or diminished welfare, now
or in the future.
Strategic Objective
Provide centralized services and shared solutions that promote cost savings and
environmental sustainability, enabling agencies to focus on mission delivery.
18
Evaluation Topic 4.1: Greening of the fleet
What programs or policies are effective at promoting greening of the
fleet, including use of electric or other zero emission vehicles?
Overview
GSA Fleet will play a major role procuring electric vehicles (EVs) for the Federal fleet to
proactively address the climate crisis. GSA is the mandatory source for executive
agencies purchasing non-tactical vehicles in the United States, so it will continue to
expand the available EV options for agencies to purchase. GSA's end-to-end vehicle
leasing program for the Federal Government includes over 227,000 vehicles. In support
of Executive Order 14008 (Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad), GSA will
continue to use the Federal Government's buying power to electrify the Federal fleet.
Given this executive order and GSA's extensive fleet operational experience and
automotive industry expertise, GSA is working closely with Federal agencies in:
developing an aggressive action plan to rapidly electrify the Federal fleet;
participating in the White House's Council on Environmental Quality steering
committee and working groups to craft the best solutions for electrifying the
Federal fleet and tackling charging-station infrastructure; and
co-leading (with the U.S. Department of Energy) an interagency working group that
meets monthly to tackle fleet electrification.
Currently, 35 Federal agencies have procured EVs from the GSA Fleet. These EVs
include electric sedans, cargo vans, minivans, and SUVs.
Evaluation Approach and Timeline
GSA will identify key targets for foundational fact-finding in FY 2022. This fact-finding will
be used to identify data gaps, understand customer needs and potential barriers to
purchasing, leasing, and using EVs, and will investigate the physical infrastructure
needed to promote EV use. The foundational fact-finding is intended to identify evaluation
opportunities in FY 2023.
FY 2022
FY 2023
FY 2024
FY 2025
Evaluation Activity
Q1
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Formative evaluation of pilots to increase the
use of EVs
19
Key Data and Information
Key data and information to inform Evaluation Topic 4.1 could include:
Vehicle usage data, including telematics where available to understand which
vehicles may be high value targets for replacement;
(If available) Zero-emission vehicle Planning and Charging (ZPAC) tool data and
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) planning data to understand
infrastructure needs and opportunities;
Discussions with fleet managers and vehicle users at other federal agencies to
understand what factors guide EV utilization decisions and identify possible
opportunities for implementing novel strategies for increasing EV use or reducing
high-emission behavior.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Due to COVID-19, governmentwide travel and vehicle use will likely be curtailed for an
extended period of time. This will affect the ability to initiate evaluations of standard travel
behavior, including use of fleet vehicles. GSA does not have access to all agency fleet or
travel data, which continues to be an ongoing challenge. GSA will identify partner
agencies and initiate data sharing activities to expand the available data. Fleet data, in
particular, will require further investment and cooperation from partner activities, both
within and outside of GSA, to serve as reliable indicators and outcomes for future
evidence building activities.
Evidence Use and Dissemination
Foundational fact-finding in FY 2022 will be used to target at least one priority evaluation
in FY 2023 related to the greening of the Federal fleet. GSA will continue to coordinate
with internal and external stakeholders to refine evaluation plans for FYs 2024 and 2025.
20
