GSA
U.S. General Services Administration
U.S. General Services Administration
FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
March 28, 2022
Table of Contents
Our Plan
3
Learning Questions
4
Real Estate Solutions
5
Case for Learning
5
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
6
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
7
Utilization
7
Acquisition
8
Case for Learning
8
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
9
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
10
Utilization
10
Digital Government
11
Case for Learning
11
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
12
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
12
Utilization
12
Government Operations
13
Case for Learning
13
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
14
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
14
Utilization
15
Next Steps: GSA FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
16
2
Our Plan
The U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) is committed to ensuring a strong
culture of evaluation, evidence-building, and learning. GSA's Learning Agenda sets a
series of agencywide learning targets in alignment with GSA's strategic objectives and in
collaboration with varied offices across GSA. Implementation of the Learning Agenda
offers an opportunity to improve how GSA builds and uses evidence to better align
performance, budget, strategic planning, policymaking, data, and evidence-building
activities.
In developing the Learning Agenda, GSA engaged internal and external stakeholders.
Internally this included key stakeholders from across the agency, as they advised and
helped develop questions for inclusion in the Learning Agenda. Externally this included
insights shared by the Office of Management and Budget. These collaborative activities
resulted in a final recommendation to the Administrator to ensure alignment with GSA's
overarching priorities and strategy. GSA's Evaluation Officer worked closely with varied
stakeholders with expertise in the program areas to ensure that the Learning Agenda is
relevant, realistic, and meaningful.
To develop a learning agenda grounded in the agency's strategic direction, GSA has
identified key learning priorities that align to the strategic goals and objectives. They
include a range of strategic and operational questions, and represent an evolution of
GSA's prior learning priorities. GSA also received increased funding enabling us to build
capacity by hiring additional dedicated evaluation specialists to progress our agenda.
GSA's Learning Agenda is organized around GSA's strategic priorities: Real Estate
Solutions, Acquisition, Digital Government, and Government Operations. GSA has
prioritized four learning goals, with the intention of building a robust evidence base around
these topic areas. GSA's Evaluation Officer is working closely with leadership from GSA
program areas to ensure that the Learning Agenda is relevant, realistic, and meaningful,
and directly in service of GSA's Strategic Plan and priorities. Over the coming months,
GSA will gather external feedback on the updated agenda, including the public, state and
local governments, the private sector and other expert input.
GSA understands that there will be ongoing changes to investments and programs
resulting from new legislation. As such, we view this document as living and subject to
change. Current learning questions purposefully leave room to accommodate shifting
priorities, and GSA expects updates to the Learning Agenda in response to changes to
existing programs or new initiatives. Our intention is to maintain a continuous feedback
cycle with leadership and key stakeholders to ensure that our Learning Agenda remains
focused but flexible. GSA will include and prioritize updates to this document as capacity
allows.
3
Learning Questions
The Learning Agenda includes a range of strategic and operational questions, and short-
and long-term learning targets. For each learning question, we have identified possible
topics for further evidence-building currently under development and consideration.
These projects may be supported by policy analysis, foundational fact-finding, program
evaluation and/or performance measurement activities between fiscal years (FY) 2022
and 2026. Further details on priority evaluation activities will be detailed in GSA's Annual
Evaluation Plans. While the Annual Evaluation Plan will support progress on the Learning
Agenda, these efforts will also have additional and independent workstreams and thus
not fully overlap.
4
Real Estate Solutions
Learning
Question
What technologies and solutions does the Federal workforce need
to additionally improve effectiveness in a more responsive remote
work setting?
Learning Type
Foundational fact-finding; operational; short term
Program evaluation; strategic; short term and long term
Lead Team
Public Buildings Service
Key Strategic
Develop and offer integrated space and virtual workspace options
Objective
and services that maximize flexibility, particularly in anticipation of
increased telework.
Case for Learning
The Public Buildings Service (PBS) aims to provide financially and environmentally
sustainable, accessible, optimized, and responsive workspace solutions that enable a
productive Federal workforce. This means developing and deploying innovative solutions
that give Federal employees greater workspace flexibilities. GSA manages and maintains
one of the nation's largest and most diverse real estate portfolios that supports more than
50 agencies, and houses nearly 1 million Federal employees. PBS houses nearly 50% of
the total Federal civilian workforce, which makes it the landholding agency that houses
the most Federal civilians.
This learning question helps PBS build the evidence needed to inform its strategic
decisions about:
Optimizing GSA's Real Estate Portfolio
Reducing vacant inventory space, and
Solution sets for customers that integrate real estate, human resource, and
technology solutions
This learning will generate evidence that enables actionable approaches to meeting
customers' evolving needs, while remaining focused on right-sizing GSA's Federal real
estate portfolio to be financially and environmentally sustainable.
In addition, the impacts that COVID-19 will have on the demand for real estate portfolios
are still unknown. It is vital that PBS understands the long- and short-term effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic and how these effects will shape the demand of physical
5
workspaces, and what new workspace solutions PBS will need to offer that enable
agencies to use a mix of on-site and remote work postures to perform their missions. PBS
will work to balance these evolving needs with long-term real estate decisions, while also
identifying where there are knowledge gaps and limitations that need to be resolved or
filled in over time.
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
PBS will answer this learning question through a variety of evidence-building activities
over the span of the Learning Agenda period. Priority initiatives under consideration in
service of this Learning Goal include:
How will the return to facilities impact employee engagement, satisfaction, health,
and productivity?
What features of new, adaptive workspace solutions satisfy customer needs and
real estate demands in the short- and medium-term?
What programs and workspace solutions improve collaboration and engagement
for the Federal workforce?
What processes or procedures should be streamlined and scaled nationally, to
achieve speed of delivery and a consistently high-customer real estate
experience?
What is the demand for PBS to provide other services and how will that demand
influence holding and reinvestment strategies for real property so that assets
retained are viable and sustainable?
How are space requirements changing in terms of needed space and use of space
in a more flexible work environment?
What will be the impact on local communities of a dramatic and relatively rapid shift
in the federal government's real estate footprint, and the constellation of partners
reliant on the pre-pandemic patterns of the federal workforce?
What strategies and technologies are most effective to efficiently operate and
maintain Federal facilities and reduce adverse climate impacts?
In the immediate term, PBS will integrate evidence-building initiatives and evaluation into
its Workplace 2030 initiative and prioritize learning and evaluation as part of GSA's
reentry plans. GSA will also explore agency collaborations to generate short-term,
actionable evidence on varied reentry approaches, including possible collaboration with
the Office of Personnel Management and the Office of Management and Budget, to
directly inform PBS offerings and planning. GSA will also explore other potential
collaborations on shared priorities with relevant agencies where there may be overlap in
learning priorities.
6
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Addressing the learning questions in a meaningful way will require continued data
integration and refinement, and operational flexibility to incorporate testing and evaluation
into implementation strategies. PBS will continue identifying data gaps, including data
sources to which they do not yet have access, and where possible, develop and
implement detailed plans for gaining access to and integrating the data to enhance the
overall data architecture.
As with all learning priorities, GSA will prioritize piloting and learning around GSA's
reentry plan and workspace solutions needs, as part of a broader portfolio of
governmentwide collaborations. To build rigorous evidence around GSA's broader
offerings, agency partners will need to be willing to participate in embedded evaluation
efforts. GSA has a strong track record of cross-agency collaboration and data sharing in
service of rigorous evidence and learning, which can be leveraged in service of this
learning priority.
Utilization
Evidence will inform PBS's approach and decisions on workspace solution offerings in
the short and long terms. GSA will use evidence from the Workplace 2030 initiative to
inform new services for Federal customers that support acquisition of furniture and IT
equipment for teleworkers.
7
Acquisition
Question
What strategies are most effective at increasing participation in
procurement and contracting opportunities for underserved
communities and small businesses?
Learning Type
Foundational Fact-Finding; strategic and operational; short
term
Policy Analysis; operational; short term
Program evaluation; strategic; long-term
Lead Teams
Federal Acquisition Service
Office of Government-wide Policy
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
Key Strategic
Aid U.S. economic growth by maximizing opportunities and
Objective
minimizing barriers for small and/or underserved businesses
seeking to do business with GSA.
Case for Learning
The Federal Acquisition Service's (FAS) goal is to provide a modern, accessible, and
streamlined acquisition system including solutions to support Federal agency customers
and a robust marketplace connecting buyers to the suppliers and businesses that meet
their mission needs. The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization's
(OSDBU) goal is to ensure small businesses have the maximum practicable opportunity
to provide goods and services to the Federal Government. OGP helps agency partners
prepare for the future of mission delivery by leveraging smart policy, analytical data, and
dynamic program implementation across Government. Together, GSA seeks to refine its
acquisition process to help small businesses better identify opportunities to engage with
the Federal Government. GSA is committed to building the industrial base, breaking down
barriers, and increasing Federal opportunities for small, disadvantaged, and
socioeconomic businesses by instituting a multifaceted approach. ($58.7 billion¹ was
earned from a percentage of FAS contract spend and applied to FAS procurement
programs in FY 2020.) Examining equity in the programs has the potential to remove
barriers and increase contract dollars awarded to underserved communities.
This learning question helps OSDBU and FAS build the evidence needed to inform
strategic decisions about:
Where and when to make changes and investments, and
1 Data obtained through GSA's Office of Enterprise Strategy Management for FAS's FSS, GWAC. and
International Data Corporation (IDC) programs for FY 2020.
8
How to improve engagement with small businesses throughout the acquisition
lifecycle.
While GSA has made progress on meeting small business-related performance targets,
this process will help GSA identify where to make future investments and how to further
improve its engagements with small businesses.
This learning will inform the shape and structure of small business acquisition
programming, such as inreach and outreach engagements and e-tools for sharing
information. It will also build actionable evidence around the acquisition process for small
businesses and the acquisition workforce, informing programming to support small
businesses and reduce existing hurdles.
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
OSDBU and FAS will answer this learning question through a variety of evidence-building
activities over the span of the Learning Agenda period. This section contains high-level
examples of multi-year learning activities. Initial priorities will focus on potential disparities
or success barriers for underserved communities in Federal contracting and identify areas
for further evidence-building activities and evaluation.
Illustrative activities and questions to further GSA's learning include:
How do small and disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) fare in access to acquisition
opportunities and outcomes relative to similarly situated peers across communities
and in the broader marketplace of small businesses?
What opportunities exist in GSA acquisition policy to streamline processes and
eliminate potential barriers to entry and barriers to winning contracts for SDBs?
What insights can the SDB community offer on their experiences, challenges, and
successes to eliminate barriers and improve the SDB experience?
What barriers to procurement and contracting opportunities stem from legislation
or are associated with the FAR? What evidence-based changes can be
implemented and what effect do they have to mitigate unintended consequences?
What acquisition program or policy changes can address and reduce
administrative barriers for GSA customers, especially those that have a
disproportionate impact on underserved communities?
What new tools and support does the acquisition workforce require to expand their
outreach efforts?
GSA is exploring collaborations with the Small Business Administration's Evaluation
Office to support learning of mutual interest to both agencies.
9
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Addressing the learning questions in a meaningful way will require continued data
collection, integration, and refinement. FAS, in partnership with OSDBU, will identify data
gaps, including data sources to which they do not yet have access, and develop a detailed
plan for gaining access to and integrating the data to enhance the overall data structure
in the first phase. FAS will build on its existing data strategy to improve the quality and
utility of data that is available for use in decision-making This could include synthesizing
and sharing data across the organization and from multiple sources, so that the data are
accessible, reliable, and useful. In addition, it could highlight additional needs associated
with current data and how to resolve them.
Utilization
Evidence will inform FAS's approach and decisions on offerings, operations, and policies
in the short and long terms.
10
Digital Government
Question
How can GSA Technology solutions support effective service
delivery to the public?
Learning Type
Foundational fact-finding; operational; short term
Program evaluation and policy analysis; strategic; short and
long term
Lead Teams
Technology Transformation Services
Office of Customer Experience
Office of Government-wide Policy
Office of GSA IT
Key Strategic
Implement inclusive, accessible, and equitable design practices
Objective
that improve customer experience with technology and digital
platforms.
Case for Learning
TTS (Technology Transformation Services) strives for a digital government that delivers
for the public through trusted, accessible, and user-centered technologies. TTS helps
agencies make their services more accessible, efficient, and effective with modern
applications, platforms, processes, personnel, and software solutions and to empower
the public with better access to Government information and resources. With a focus on
unifying, improving, and standardizing the experience the public has while interacting with
the Federal Government, TTS has a number of digital platforms it has developed.
Evidence on how to best leverage these solutions, improve and expand the solutions,
and meet customer and public needs will be in direct service to GSA's Learning Agenda.
For example, TTS leads login.gov, USAGOV and US Web Design Systems. Login.gov
offers users simple, secure access to online Government services. Users will be able to
sign in with a single set of credentials for all participating Government programs. USAGov
connects people with Government information more than 700 million times a year through
its websites (USA.gov and USAGov en español), social media, publications, email, and
phone calls to the USAGov Contact Center. And the U.S. Web Design System (USWDS)
makes it easier to build accessible, mobile-friendly Federal Government websites for the
American public. Given the reach and scale of TTS offerings, further evidence on how to
best leverage these services to better serve the public will be key in assisting GSA in
delivering on its mission.
11
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
TTS's wide range of offerings and services offers enormous potential for learning. Initial
priorities to explore in service of GSA's Learning Agenda include:
Does digital identity proofing create or remove barriers in accessing public
services? How can login gov ensure equitable participation and better serve
underserved communities?
How can US web design systems improve accessibility? For whom?
Does USA.gov improve information access to underserved communities?
What technology improves the trust, experience, and engagement with
digital services for tribal communities?
How can vote.gov improve access to voter information and registrations for
underserved communities?
GSA evidence-building efforts will closely coordinate with and operate in support of GSA's
ongoing equity assessments. Understanding more about the potential benefits of
Login.gov to serve as a front door for digital services, as well as equity and accessibility
considerations are critical to providing simple, secure login for everyone.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
Measurement of reach and impact on the public, resulting from TTS services and
offerings, will continue to pose a challenge when developing evidence moving forward.
Data on user outcomes on a broad scale are not consistently collected currently, and will
require significant effort and resources to capture reliably. Further complicating these
efforts, such user outcomes are often one or more degrees separated from the user's
contact with TTS. As GSA explores promising modifications to programs and platforms
with potential to enhance impact, statutory requirements may pose some limitations
inhibiting the range of possible modifications. Further, embedding evaluation into TTS
offerings and outreach may require changes in terms of client engagement and
operations, adding additional complexity and requiring additional capacity.
Utilization
Evidence will inform TTS's approach and decisions on solutions and offerings in the short
and long terms.
12
Government Operations
Question
What GSA programs and policies are effective at improving climate
adaptation, resilience, and mitigation?
Learning Type
Program evaluation and policy analysis; operational and strategic;
short and long term
Lead Team
Office of Government-wide Policy
Key Strategic
Provide centralized services and shared solutions that promote
Objective
cost savings and environmental sustainability, enabling agencies
to focus on mission delivery.
Case for Learning
The Office of Government-wide Policy's (OGP) mission is to provide innovative solutions
for the future of Government. OGP helps agency partners prepare for the future of mission
delivery by leveraging smart policy, analytical data, and dynamic program implementation
across Government. OGP aims to be the trusted partner leading to better Government
with improved citizen experiences and savings. One key aspect of this is prioritizing an
understanding of climate change risks and opportunities.
This effort supports OGP's overall mission by modeling how we build and use evidence
to improve internal operations and inform policy guidance across the Government.
Progress will require continuing to improve the use of data for decision-making and
accountability for the Federal Government, including for policy-making, innovation,
oversight, and learning. OGP will use the best available science-based climate data and
develop and use new data sources and tools to better inform decision-making, including
through risk-informed processes to identify its vulnerability to climate disruptions. High-
quality data will allow us to run rapid, low-cost tests and identify effective policy changes,
and we will identify, prioritize, and make progress on data gaps.
In formulating policy, OGP will work to advance equitable distribution of environmental
risks and benefits and to avoid actions that may lead to increased risk of adverse climate-
related outcomes, increased vulnerability to climate change, or diminished welfare, now
or in the future.
13
Learning Activities and Potential Approaches
OGP's diverse portfolio offers enormous potential for learning. Priority initiatives under
consideration in service of this Learning Goal include:
What programs or policies are effective at promoting greening of the fleet, including
use of electric or other zero emission vehicles?
What changes in federal travel policies are effective at improving climate
adaptation, resilience and mitigation?
Where are there opportunities to use the acquisition system to incentivize
contractors to mitigate climate impact and plan for climate related risks?
Which technologies, existing or emerging, enable GSA to minimize adverse
impacts from climate and maximize greenhouse gas emissions mitigation?
What strategies and technologies are most effective to efficiently operate and
maintain federal facilities and reduce adverse climate impacts from operations or
from severe weather events?
OGP anticipates making progress on evidence gaps through program evaluation, policy
analysis, and data investments. This learning work has both strong data systems to
capitalize on, as well as data systems which can benefit from focused efforts and
investment. The existing data can be used as a foundation for rapid cycle testing and also
long-term evaluations in the years ahead. This will allow us to make short-term progress,
generating actionable evidence in the near-term, which will inform longer-term strategic
learning opportunities. A focus on this area will also allow us to identify and prioritize the
data gaps, and invest resources to ensure GSA data systems support continuous
improvement and innovation in its services and policy areas. GSA will explore additional
learning opportunities across OGP portfolios.
Anticipated Challenges and Solutions
GSA will identify partner agencies and initiate data sharing activities to expand the
available data. Fleet data, in particular, will require further investment and cooperation
from partner activities, both within and outside of GSA, to serve as reliable indicators and
outcomes for future evidence building activities.
In addition, implementing changes to federally owned buildings to address climate threats
depends on the availability of funding to perform repairs and modernizations.
14
Utilization
Evidence will inform OGP's approach and decisions on governmentwide policies in the
short and long term. Further details on evidence utilization plans forthcoming.
15
Next Steps: GSA FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
GSA's Learning Agenda and Annual Evaluation plans will be adapted to account for any
major changes to Administration or Agency strategic priorities. GSA will also refine and
specify utilization targets, to ensure evidence generated has a clear and concrete
application and use case detailed.
GSA is planning to solicit additional external stakeholder feedback which, as
implemented, will also inform Learning Agenda priorities and implementation. Upon
publishing the Learning Agenda, GSA will develop a plan to gather external feedback and
update the Learning Agenda as needed. Stakeholders engaged will include the public,
State and local governments, and representatives of non-governmental researchers.
16
