SERVICES USA
of
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES
Capacity Assessment
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Contents
Introduction
2
Methods and Approach
2
Assessment of Coverage, Quality, Methods, Effectiveness, and Independence of HHS Statistics,
Evaluation, Research, and Analysis
5
Assessment Area: Coverage
7
Assessment Area: Quality
8
Assessment Area: Methods
11
Assessment Area: Effectiveness
14
Assessment Area: Independence
17
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the agency
support the needs of various divisions within the agency (5 USC $306(a)(9)(B))
20
The extent to which the evaluation, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the agency
address an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational learning, ongoing program
management, performance management, strategic management, interagency and private sector
coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability (5 USC $306(a)(9)(C))
22
The extent to which the agency uses methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate to
agency divisions and corresponding research questions being addressed, including an appropriate
combination of formative and summative evaluation research and analysis approaches (5 USC
$306(a)(9)(D)
23
The extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present within the agency to include personnel
and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities, disseminating best practices
and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback (5 USC $306(a)(9)(E))
24
The extent to which the agency has the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to develop
the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-day operations
(5 USC $306(a)(9)(F))
25
Appendix A: List of Activities Policies and Requirements
26
Appendix B: Policies and Requirements Pertaining to Assessment Areas
31
Page 1 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Introduction
As required by the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act), the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has conducted an assessment of the agency's
evaluation and evidence-building capacity. In September of 2020, HHS submitted an interim HHS
Capacity Assessment to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). This document is the Draft
Capacity Assessment called for in OMB memorandum M-19-23, M-21-27, and Circular A-11.
The Capacity Assessment requires agencies to assess the coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and
independence of their statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis efforts. Agencies must also address
the following as part of the Capacity Assessment for Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis:
A list of the activities (e.g., programs, initiatives, etc.) and operations (e.g., administrative and
support tasks) of the agency that are currently being evaluated and analyzed;
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency support the needs of various divisions within the agency;
The extent to which the evaluation, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency address an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational learning,
ongoing program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency
and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability;
The extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present within the agency to
include personnel and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities,
disseminating best practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback;
and
The extent to which the agency has the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to
develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-
day operations.
In drafting the Capacity Assessment, OMB has encouraged agencies to use a format, process, and
structure that best meets their specific context. There is no template or specific format for this
document, but OMB expects that each agency's assessment will include discussion and analysis of the
five criteria (i.e., coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence) for their statistics,
evaluation, research, and analysis activities, including the specific components in the bullets above. To
meet the requirements of the Capacity Assessment HHS has employed a multi-method approach
to conduct the Capacity Assessment as described below. All activities described in this document are
subject to availability of appropriations.
Methods and Approach
HHS has employed the following approaches to meet the requirements of the Capacity Assessment,
proposed by the Division of Evidence, Evaluation and Data Policy in the Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Planning and Evaluation and approved by the HHS Evidence and Evaluation (E&E) Council. The
Council predates the Evidence Act and is made up of senior evaluation staff and subject matter experts
from each agency within HHS. The Council meets monthly to address issues related to evidence-building
and evaluation policies or activities across HHS, with a recent focus on Evidence Act implementation
Page 2 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
activities. The assessment employed multiple methods and builds upon the previous efforts initiated for
the Interim Capacity Assessment. These methods included:
Incorporating results from the Interim Capacity Assessment staff survey;
Identifying existing requirements pertaining to the assessment areas;
Determining the scope of activities and operations being evaluated and analyzed in alignment
with other Evidence Act materials;
Conducting key informant interviews with the three Evidence Act designated officials;
Consulting HHS Evidence & Evaluation Council; and
Engaging stakeholders
More detail is provided below on these approaches.
1. Results from the Interim Capacity Assessment staff survey
To determine baseline levels of capacity for building and using evidence within the Department, HHS
conducted a survey of evaluation staff across May and June of 2020. This survey was distributed through
the HHS Evidence and Evaluation Council and received 72 responses across 12 operating and staff
divisions. This survey and analysis of results was used to create the high-level baseline and findings for
the previously submitted interim Capacity Assessment. These results and responses to OMB comments
on the results are reflected in the final HHS Capacity Assessment.
2. Requirements Pertaining to the Assessment Areas
The capacity assessment identified existing policies, standards, and practices that require and support
the quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of agency evaluations, statistics, research, and
analysis. This was accomplished by a review of agency websites and publications, supplemented by key
informant interviews. The results identified current policies, directives, memorandum, and other
documents issued by OMB, the Department, and relevant external organizations to ensure quality,
appropriate methodology, effectiveness, and independence. Many of these policies and procedures
were established in order to comply with legislative and regulatory requirements, such as OMB's
Guidelines implementing the Information Quality Act and related Federal guidelines and Memorandum.
Current OMB Directives and Guidelines include additional specific practices and procedures that ensure
the quality, effectiveness, appropriate methods, and independence of evaluations, statistics, research,
and analysis conducted by HHS. HHS has drawn upon these existing federal policies and guidance as
well as agency policies in developing the HHS Capacity Assessment.
3. List of Activities and Operations of the Agency that are Currently being Evaluated and
Analyzed
HHS has defined the scope for the Department's activities and operations that are currently being
evaluated and analyzed in order to compile a manageable list of activities that are meaningful and
significant, focused on HHS priority goals and strategic initiatives. Major statistical activities and
significant program evaluations are in scope, for example, while program evaluations as a condition of
grant awards are generally excluded, along with audits and investigations. HHS is including with this
submission a list of significant activities and operations for each of the priority questions identified in
the HHS Evidence Building plan. These priority areas, in alignment with the HHS 2023-2026 Strategic
Plan, are: 1) Health Care: Protect and Strengthen Equitable Access to High Quality and Affordable Health
Page 3 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Care; 2) Human Services: Strengthen Social Well-being, Equity, and Economic Resilience; 3) Research &
Evidence: Restore Trust and Accelerate Advancements in Science and Research for All; 4) Public Health:
Safeguard and Improve National and Global Health Conditions and Outcomes; and, 5) Management:
Advance Strategic Management to Build Trust, Transparency, and Accountability.
4. Interviews with Evidence Act Designated Officials
The Chief Data Officer, Evaluation Officer, and Statistical Official play a significant role in capacity
development across HHS' statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis efforts and each official has
insight into different aspects of the agency's capacity to carry out these efforts. These designated
officials have coordinated efforts throughout the implementation of the Evidence Act and each was
interviewed for the final Capacity Assessment to ensure that their insights are included.
5. Consult HHS Evidence and Evaluation Council
The HHS E&E Council functions as a forum for leaders and subject matter experts in evaluation and
evidence-building across the agency to coordinate on cross-agency issues. The diversity of HHS agencies
in terms of size, mission, and activities creates challenges for developing a single Capacity Assessment
that is both comprehensive and accurate across agencies. Members of the Council are uniquely
positioned to provide input on the Capacity Assessment, particularly in terms of identifying trends that
apply across operating and staff divisions. The E&E Council predates the Evidence Act and is composed
of evaluation staff and leadership from across the Department, with expertise in evaluation, evidence-
building, statistics, and data policy. The Council and its Capacity Assessment Subcommittee have
provided cross-departmental coordination and feedback throughout the process.
6. Engage Key Stakeholders
Agencies are to engage with internal and external stakeholders throughout the process to ensure that
the capacity assessment is relevant and meaningful to those with direct interests in the agency's
functions. OMB has provided flexibility for agencies to gather input in the manner that best meets their
needs and leverages existing activities and/or requirements whenever possible. HHS engaged
stakeholders with varying levels and types of expertise and influence across the Department, utilizing
existing communication channels and bodies, such as the HHS E&E Council. The E&E Council, and
specifically a Capacity Assessment Subcommittee, have supported development of the Capacity
Assessment, cross-department coordination, and identification of stakeholders to be engaged.
Stakeholders include the three Evidence Act designated officials-the Chief Data Officer (CDO),
Evaluation Officer (EO), and Statistical Official (SO) as well as HHS leadership, operating and staff
divisions, and evaluation staff and leadership across the Department. Specific stakeholders are listed
below:
HHS leadership
Operating and staff divisions
Chief Data Officer (CDO), Kevin M. Duvall
Evaluation Officer (EO), Laina Bush
Statistical Official (SO), Brian Moyer
Evidence & Evaluation Council
Capacity Assessment Subcommittee
Page 4 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Other federal agency Evidence Act leadership and staff
The Office of Management & Budget
Assessment of Coverage, Quality, Methods, Effectiveness, and Independence of HHS
Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis
HHS has drawn upon existing federal policies and guidance identified in Circular A-11 as well as agency
policies and guidance from relevant external entities in developing the HHS Capacity Assessment. The
capacity assessment identified existing policies, standards, and practices that require and support the
quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of agency evaluations, statistics, research, and
analysis. This was accomplished by a review of agency websites and publications, supplemented by key
informant interviews. The results identified current policies, directives, memorandum, and other
documents issued by OMB, the Department, and relevant external organizations to ensure quality,
appropriate methodology, effectiveness, and independence. Many of these policies and procedures
were established in order to comply with legislative and regulatory requirements, such as OMB's
Guidelines implementing the Information Quality Act and related Federal guidelines and Memorandum.
Current OMB Directives and Guidelines include additional specific practices and procedures that ensure
the quality, effectiveness, appropriate methods, and independence of evaluations, statistics, research,
and analysis conducted by HHS.
These materials provide or inform a common foundation for agency evaluations, statistics, research, and
analysis. Taken as a whole, these complementary requirements contribute to an integrative framework
guiding the conduct of Federal evaluations, statistics, research, and analysis to ensure quality,
appropriate methods, effectiveness, and independence.
The following documents contain guidance and requirements for federal evaluations, statistics,
research, and analysis and provide a foundation for the Department to assess the coverage, quality,
methods, effectiveness, and independence of these HHS activities.
OMB Memorandum M-19-15, Improving Implementation of the Information Quality Act
OMB Memorandum M-19-18, Federal Data Strategy - A Framework for Consistency
OMB Memorandum M-19-23, Phase / Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance
OMB Memorandum M-20-12, Phase 4 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018: Program Evaluation Standards and Practices
OMB Memorandum M-21-27 Evidence-Based Policymaking: Learning Agendas and Annual
Evaluation Plans
OMB Circular A-11, Part 6, Section 290 Evaluation and Evidence-Building Activities
OMB Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of
Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies
OMB Standards and Guidelines for Statistical Surveys
OMB Guidance on Agency Survey and Statistical Information Collections
OMB Statistical Policy Directives, No. 1, 2, and 4
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
National Academics of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Principles and Practices for a
Federal Statistical Agency, 7th edition. (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2021)
Page 5 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Principles and Practices for Federal
Program Evaluation: Proceedings of a Workshop (Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
2017)
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Fostering Integrity in Research
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2017)
Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology, A Framework for Data Quality
Presidential Memorandum, Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and
Evidence-Based Policymaking
HHS Policies and Guidance
Evaluation Policy for the Department of Health and Human Services
(https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/migrated_legacy_files//200386/hhs-evaluation-
policy.pdf)
Administration for Children and Families, HHS. Common Framework for Research and Evaluation
(https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/opre/acf_common_framework_for_
search_and_evaluation_vO2_a.pdf)
Administration for Children and Families, HHS. ACF Evaluation Policy
(https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/opre/acf-evaluation-policy-november-
9-2021.pdf)
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, HHS. Framework for Program Evaluation in Public
Health (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/rr/rr4811.pdf
National Institutes of Health, HHS. NIH Policies and Procedures for Promoting Scientific Integrity
(https://www.nih.gov/sites/default/files/about-nih/nih-director/testimonies/nih-policies-
procedures-promoting-scientific-integrity-2012.pdf)
Department of Health and Human Services. Policies and Principles for Assuring Scientific
Integrity (https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/policies-principles-assuring-scientific-integrity)
National Center for Health Statistics, HHS. Statement of Commitment to Scientific Integrity by
Principal Statistical Agencies
 (https://nces.ed.gov/whatsnew/commissioner/pdf/scientific_integrity_statement.pdf)
Health Resources and Services Administration, HHS. Evaluation Guide for HRSA Project Officers
(https://www.healthworkforceta.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/09/Evaluation_Guide_for_HRSA_Project_Officers.pdf)
Food and Drug Administration Key Principles of Scientific Integrity and Staff Manual Guide,
Scientific Integrity at FDA (https://www.fda.gov/media/82932/download
Administration for Community Living, ACL Evaluation Policy
(https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/programs/2021-
 09/ACL%20evaluation%20policy%2OUpdated%202021.pdf)
Indian Health Service, Evaluation Policy (https://www.ihs.gov/dper/evaluation/evaluation-
policy/)
HHS Information Quality Guidelines (https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/hhs-guidelines-ensuring
 maximizing-quality-objectivity-utility-integrity-information-disseminated
Page 6 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Assessment Area: Coverage of Evaluations, Statistics, Research and Analysis Activities
Statutory Language: a list of the activities and operations of the agency that are currently being
evaluated and analyzed 5 USC $306(a)(9)(A)
The capacity assessment includes a list of activities (e.g., programs, initiatives, etc.) and operations (e.g.,
administrative and support tasks) of the agency that are currently being evaluated and analyzed. OMB
Circular A-11 has indicated that the list of activities provides information on the coverage within the
agency, describing what efforts are ongoing and where these efforts are within the agency. HHS
conducts a substantial number of evaluations, statistical, research and analysis activities and not all are
included here. For purposes of providing a meaningful list that demonstrates the coverage of these
activities, specific examples were selected that highlight the missions and scope of programs across the
Department. Excluded from the list are audits and investigations, market research, customer satisfaction
research, budget analysis and Enterprise Risk Analysis. The table in Appendix A provides the list of
activities in HHS by title and type of activity.
The majority of activities in Appendix A fall under the purview of the Paperwork Reduction Act and have
been reviewed and approved by OMB for the collection of information associated with the activity.
More detail and information on the purpose and use, methodology, and instruments used for data
collection is available on the Information Collection Review site from OMB. For purposes of describing
the activities in this table, the following definitions found in statute or regulations were used:
Evaluation: The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act describes evaluation as an
assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of one or more programs, policies, and
organizations intended to assess their effectiveness and efficiency. Evaluation involves the systematic
collection and analysis of information about the characteristics and outcomes of the program, including
projects conducted under such program, as a basis for making judgments and evaluations regarding the
program; improving program effectiveness; and informing decisions about current and future
programming. Evaluation activities in the list include process evaluations, formative evaluations,
outcome/impact evaluations, and descriptive studies (OMB M-18-04; OMB M-19-23; OMB M-20-12).
Statistical activities: The collection, compilation, processing, or analysis of data for the purpose of
describing or making estimates concerning the whole, or relevant groups or components within, the
economy, society, or the natural environment; and incudes the development of methods or resources
that support those activities, such as measurement methods, models, statistical classifications, or
sampling frames (44 USC ยง 3561(10)). Statistical activities in the list include data collection,
measurement, and methodological activities.
Research and analysis: Federal regulations under 45 CFR $46.102 define research as a systematic
investigation, including development, testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to
generalizable knowledge. Research and analysis activities may overlap with other activities (e.g.,
statistics and evaluation) depending on methods and purpose, and include: foundational fact finding,
research and development activities, and policy and program analysis.
With its 11 operating divisions, HHS administers a broad range of health and human services and fosters
sound, sustained advances in the sciences underlying medicine, public health, and social services. This
list of activities that are currently being evaluated and analyzed (a) provides information on the
coverage of efforts across HHS and (b) informs the assessment of the extent to which these activities
Page 7 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
meet the needs of the Department. The HHS FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan includes five priority areas
that the activities above cover: 1) Health Care: Protect and Strengthen Equitable Access to High Quality
and Affordable Health Care; 2) Public Health: Safeguard and Improve National and Global Health
Conditions and Outcomes; 3) Human Services: Strengthen Social Well-being, Equity, and Economic
Resilience; 4) Research & Evidence: Restore Trust and Accelerate Advancements in Science and Research
for All;and, 5) Management: Advance Strategic Management to Build Trust, Transparency, and
Accountability.
Some activities in the list above address multiple priority areas. For example, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) Public Health Science Agenda for COVID-19 guides the development of the
evidence base needed to strengthen the public health actions, guidance, and policy essential to limit the
spread and impact of SARS-CoV-2. In addition to specific clinical actions, the science agenda includes
focused efforts on surveillance, epidemiologic investigations, and mathematical modeling. This agenda
is pursuing multiple lines of research, including assessments of different types of specimens, assays,
serial testing strategies and additional research and analytic efforts to advance the understanding of
COVID-19 and mitigate its impact. This effort supports the priority area of Research and Evidence as well
as the Public Health priority area, and includes evaluation, statistical, research and analytical activities.
Other activities address a single priority area, such as CMS's Evaluation of the Value-Based Insurance
Design Model which addresses the Health Care priority area.
Assessment Area: Quality of Evaluations, Statistics, Research and Analysis Activities
The assessment area of quality is described in OMB Circular A-11 as whether the data that are used are
of high quality with respect to utility, objectivity, and integrity. Objectivity, utility, and integrity are
components of a basic standard of quality as outlined in OMB's Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing
the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies. They
also serve as the domains of data quality in the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology's
Framework for Data Quality.
HHS guidelines implementing OMB requirements under the Information Quality Act (Pub. L. 106-555,
section 515) serve to ensure and maximize the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information
disseminated by federal agencies. These guidelines ensure that disseminated information meets a
certain level of quality, and that more important information meets a more rigorous quality standard.
The guidelines pertain to agency information that is disseminated to the public, and the internal
processes for the quality of information, methods
and approaches that are used in the Department's
evaluations, research, analysis, or statistical
POLICIES & GUIDANCE FOR QUALITY OF HHS
reporting.
EVALUATIONS, STATISTICS, RESEARCH & ANALYSIS
Evaluations
OMB Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the
Evaluation as defined in the Foundations for
Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (Public Law 115-
Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies
435) means an assessment using systematic data
collection and analysis of one or more programs,
Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements
policies, and organizations intended to assess
Page 8 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
their effectiveness and efficiency. HHS issued the Evaluation Policy for the Department of Health and
Human Services to affirm and implement the Department's commitment to systematic evaluations of
programs and services that are of high-quality and support decision-making build on evidence. This
policy was strongly guided by OMB's memorandum M-20-12 on Program Evaluation Standards and
Practices which are designed to improve the quality and use of evaluations across Federal agencies.
The standards and practices issued by OMB for federal program evaluations have been disseminated
across the Department to improve HHS program evaluations and inform evaluation staff as they
implement Evidence Act requirements. The issuance of the standards, and the release of the HHS
Evaluation Policy, are moving the Department to continued improvements in the quality of agency
evaluations.
Evaluation at HHS is conducted across the Department to ensure program, policy, and organizational
quality as well as to develop evidence to inform the development of new programs, policies, and
organizations within HHS. The Evaluation Officer of HHS is situated in the Office of the Assistant
Secretary of Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) in the Office of the Secretary of HHS. However, evaluations
and support for evaluators at HHS occur throughout the agency as operating and staff divisions can
include evaluation support staff, evaluation directors, and evaluators. Both the evaluation staff and the
evaluations vary across HHS in terms of maturity and capacity, depending upon agency mission, budget,
and priorities. The Evaluation Officer provides support to staff and operating divisions in the form of
coordination and dissemination of best practices through the Evidence and Evaluation Council.
HHS ensures a high standard of evaluation quality through culture, policy, and a skilled and qualified
staff. HHS has a culture and history of maintaining quality research, analysis, statistics, and evaluation.
HHS evaluation staff members are proud to uphold the scientific reputation of HHS. Many evaluation
staff are active members of professional associations such as the American Evaluation Association, and
HHS encourages staff to participate in trainings, conferences, and professional associations. The
capacity assessment survey found that nearly all the Operating Divisions (OpDivs) and Staff Divisions
(StaffDivs) participating in the Capacity Assessment Survey stated that their organization communicated
with external stakeholders through training and technical assistance, expert and stakeholder
consultation, Federal Advisory Committees, and other conferences and events. Additionally, the vast
majority of all survey respondents, including respondents at every staff and operating division,
expressed belief that staff are encouraged to actively ask questions, gather information, and think
critically about how to improve their own work.
Some OpDivs in HHS have developed additional policies and procedures to ensure quality of evaluation
activities. For example, the CDC Evaluation Resources and Tools include best practices and strategies,
logic models, health communication tools, health impact assessments, data resources, indicators, and
measures for evaluations to assist federal staff, states, and grantees. In addition, CDC utilizes a set of 30
standards that assess the quality of evaluation activities, determining whether a set of evaluative
activities are well-designed and working to their potential. These standards were adopted from the Joint
Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation. In addition, CDC has Evaluation Guidelines and
Recommendations to inform evaluation planning and implementation in order to increase the use of
evaluation data for continuous program improvement throughout the agency.
Page 9 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Statistics
Statistics produced across HHS provide information that is used to inform decisions regarding policy and
program needs, improvements and effectiveness. The principal federal statistical agency for health at
HHS is the CDC's National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), whose activities are predominantly the
collection, compilation, processing, or analysis of information for statistical purposes as defined by the
Evidence Act (44 U.S.C. 3561(10)). HHS also relies upon statistics produced by a substantial number of
programs across the Department that are engaged in statistical activities and other evidence-building
functions.
NCHS has applicable quality requirements specific to Federal statistical agencies, and OMB's Statistical
and Science Policy Office, headed by the U.S. Chief Statistician, coordinates the activities of the Federal
Statistical System. This coordination ensures the efficiency and effectiveness of the system, as well as
the relevance, accuracy, objectivity, and confidentiality of information collected for statistical purposes.
In this role, OMB's Statistical Policy Directives provide support for the quality of statistical information.
OMB's Statistical Policy Directive No. 1, Fundamental Responsibilities of Federal Statistical Agencies and
Recognized Statistical Units affirms the responsibilities of Federal statistical agencies in the design,
collection, processing, editing, compilation, storage, analysis, release, and dissemination of statistical
information.
NCHS is also guided by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine's Principles and
Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency. 1 These include principles regarding the relevance of statistical
information, that it be objective and accurate, and a commitment to quality and professional standards
of practice.
In assuring quality, NCHS and other statistical programs in HHS must comply with guidelines for
Information Quality, and NCHS also conducts assessments of data quality as a routine practice. In
addition, the Paperwork Reduction Act provides an assurance of certain quality requirements in order to
obtain approval from OMB to conduct information collections associated with statistical activities.
Taken together, the policies, documents, and requirements mentioned here provide a common
foundation to ensure the quality of statistical activities and guide the production of statistics produced
by HHS.
As the principal federal statistical agency for health, NCHS routinely conducts assessments of the quality
of data and statistics produced by the agency. Examples include a Preliminary Evaluation of
Nonresponse Bias Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic on National Health Interview Survey Estimates, April-
June 2020 and Assessing Linkage Eligibility Bias in the National Health Interview Survey.
Our review found that the major programs conducting statistical activities across HHS produce
publications and presentations that disseminate information on data quality, statistical briefs,
methodological reports, and documentation. These include reports providing information on sample
design for surveys, data collection procedures, major aspects of data processing such as the
development of analytic weights, as well as information on statistical measures and tests, suppression
criteria, and analytic guidelines.
1https://www.nationalacademies.org/our-work/7th-edition-of-principles-and-practices-for-a-federal-statistical-
agency
Page 10 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Research and Analysis
HHS currently uses a variety of methods and procedures designed to maximize the quality, accuracy,
objectivity, and utility of research, analyses, and scientific information disseminated by the Department.
These procedures include requirements for transparency regarding data, sources, methods, measures,
assumptions, and limitations as well as peer review, where appropriate, along with processes for
internal agency review.
Research and scientific study findings disseminated by HHS are subject to an external, objective peer
review at both the inception stage and the pre-dissemination stage as part of the publication process in
peer-reviewed journals. Substantive reports from HHS statistical activities undergo a quality review
process within their organizations before they are released, including internal and/or external review by
qualified scientists and statisticians, and, in some cases, external peer review. Results of evaluation
activities are released to the public only after agency management has taken steps to evaluate the
quality, accuracy and completeness of the report
In addition to HHS requirements, individual OpDivs have their own policies and procedures to ensure
the scientific integrity of research. For example, NIH ensures the quality and integrity of its funded
research by developing, implementing, coordinating, and overseeing policies and procedures that
provide priorities and standards for the critical processes involved in issuing and monitoring research
conducted under NIH awards. The NIH Intramural Research Program conducts research, training, and
technology transfer within its own laboratories and clinics. To help ensure the high quality and integrity
of its intramural programs, NIH has implemented NIH-wide policies and review standards for intramural
research, training, and technology transfer.
HHS also utilizes resources maintained by the federal government for assisting agencies with efforts to
ensure the quality of research and analysis activities. The Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology
(FCSM) is one source that provides guidance and publications for agencies on a number of
methodological and statistical issues that affect the quality of federal data that are used for research
and analysis.
Assessment Area: Methods in Evaluations, Statistics, Research and Analysis Activities
The assessment of methods used for evaluations, statistics, research and analysis is to determine what
methods are being used and whether they incorporate the necessary level of rigor and whether those
methods are appropriate for the activities to which they are being applied.
Evaluations
Under OMB's Program Evaluation Standards, the standard "Rigor" notes that Federal evaluations must
produce findings that Federal agencies and their stakeholders can confidently rely upon, while providing
clear explanations of limitations. The quality of an evaluation depends on the underlying design and
methods, implementation, and how findings are interpreted and reported. Credible evaluations must be
managed by qualified evaluators with relevant education, skills, and experience for the methods
undertaken. An evaluation must have the most appropriate design and methods to answer key
questions, while balancing its goals, scale, timeline, feasibility, and available resources.
Page 11 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Individual staff and operating divisions in HHS have evaluation units, teams, or support staff to ensure
that proper methods are used and that evaluation is conducted in a quality, effective, and independent
manner. For many HHS evaluations, a Paperwork Reduction Act Information Collection Request must be
submitted to OMB, making information on the methods, purpose, proposed analysis, and use publicly
available on reginfo.gov. There is variation in the extent to which OpDivs have evaluation capacity.
Certain OpDivs have well-established evaluation units with extensive expertise and experience, often
providing training and resources to other operating divisions within the Department. ACF's Office of
Planning, Research, and Evaluation (OPRE) is an example of an operating division that has a centralized
evaluation office and its own evaluation policy (in compliance with the HHS Evaluation Policy). OPRE has
a well-established evaluation program, with published research and evaluation agendas for specific
programs and offices, to conduct a broad range of rigorous empirical studies. OPRE provides guidance,
analysis, technical assistance, and oversight to ACF programs on research and evaluation methods
guided by ACF's Evaluation Policy, of which rigor is a key principle in the conduct of evaluations. OPRE
has strengthened the capacity of ACF to conduct high-quality evaluations based on rigorous and sound
methods.
The Evaluation Unit in CDC's Program Performance and Evaluation Office (PPEO) also sets standards and
expectations for agency-wide evaluations pertaining to quality, methods, and utility. PPEO provides
tools and technical assistance to enhance evaluation efforts, and also provides support for evaluation
capacity-building across CDC programs. This includes support and resources for agency evaluations
regarding the development of evaluation designs and methods. CDC requires evaluation research
designs and data collection procedures to best match the evaluation questions and the purpose and use
of the information.
In addition to the program evaluation standards and practices issued by OMB and the subsequent HHS
Evaluation Policy, the release of a recent Presidential memorandum and guidance provides HHS with
additional support and direction aimed at improving evaluation capacity, and strengthening the
methods used in evaluation activities. The Presidential Memorandum, Restoring Trust in Government
Through Scientific Integrity and Evidence-Based Policymaking and OMB's Evidence-Based Policymaking:
Learning Agendas and Annual Evaluation Plans require that scientific integrity principles be incorporated
into agency evidence-building plans and annual evaluation plans. These documents affirm that
evaluations are scientific activities and as such require the use of appropriate methods which can
include a broad range of approaches. These memos also contribute to improving evaluation activities in
HHS and guiding the development and conduct of evaluations, including the selection of designs and
methods.
Statistics
Sound methodology underpins quality statistics, and this requires adequate tools, procedures and
expertise. Appropriate statistical procedures and methods that are implemented from data collection to
data validation are fundamental to the production of quality statistics.
Page 12 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Cal
STATISTICAL
ACTIVITIES: POLICIES
The capacity assessment review of agency websites and
& GUIDANCE FOR
publications, supplemented by key informant interviews, identified
existing policies, standards, and practices that support and require
METHODS
appropriate methods for the production of agency statistics. These
policies, procedures, and statements have been established and
issued by the statistical programs across HHS to ensure quality and
OMB Statistical Policy
the use of appropriate methods. Many of these policies and
Directives
procedures were established in order to comply with legislative and
Principles & Practices for
regulatory requirements, such as OMB's Guidelines for Ensuring and
a Federal Statistical
Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of
Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies and related
Agency
guidelines and memorandum. Current OMB Directives and
OMB Standards &
Guidelines include additional specific practices and procedures for
Guidelines for Statistical
statistical agencies and recognized statistical units that support
Surveys
appropriate methods for statistical products.
NCHS and other statistical programs in HHS apply sound statistical
Information Quality
methods to ensure statistical products are accurate. These
Guidelines
programs maintain and develop in-house staff who are trained in
Standards & Guidelines
statistical methodology to properly plan, design, and implement
core data collection operations and to accurately analyze their data.
(OMB Government-wide Information Quality Guidelines; CIPSEA Implementation Guidance, 33362 at
33371; OSTP Memorandum of December 17, 2010; Principles and Practices, p. 70). Important guidance
for statistical surveys is found in OMB's Standards and Guidelines for Statistical Surveys (71 FR 55522,
Sept. 22, 2006) as well as in OMB's Standards and Guidelines for Cognitive Interviews (81 FR 29108, May
10, 2016).
Information on methods used by HHS' statistical agency, NCHS, is disseminated on a routine basis to
ensure transparency and inform the public regarding approaches used for data collection, sampling,
analysis, and other factors. Examples include reports such as, the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey Sample Design and Estimation Procedures and Using SAS/STAT to Understand the
NCI Joinpoint Regression Software: Testing for a Zero Slope Using Rates of Drug Overdose Deaths
Involving Fentanyl.
HHS' recognized statistical unit, the Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality (CBHSQ) in the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Agency (SAMHSA) also publishes reports on methodology,
such as the 2019 Methodological Summary and Definitions for the National Survey on Drug Use and
Health (NSDUH).
Interviews conducted with the designated officials under the Evidence Act identified the use of
appropriate methods as a strength in HHS statistical activities, with a mature history of established
procedures and processes, due in great part to OMB's statistical policies and requirements under the
Paperwork Reduction Act.
Page 13 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Research and Analysis
HHS relies upon research, analysis, and scientific data to inform decisions and guide the development of
policies and programs that serve the public. Research and analysis in HHS are conducted using
appropriate methods and procedures, including a broad range of methodological approaches such as
randomized control trials, survey research, qualitative research, pilot studies, and other methods.
Methods vary across the HHS operating divisions and programs depending on agency and program
missions, authorities, purpose, and use of results from research and analysis. Within HHS, certain
OpDivs, such as NIH, CDC, and FDA, have strong programs conducting and funding research and analytic
activities, and these agencies employ methods consistent with widely accepted scientific principles and
practices. NIH, for example, is the steward of medical and behavioral research for the Nation with a
mission to seek fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and the
application of that knowledge to enhance health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and disability. NIH
therefore has a long history of the application of appropriate methods and standards to their research
and analysis efforts.
Furthermore, information from research studies supported by NIH guide the transformation of clinical
and translational science programs to speed the delivery of new drugs, diagnostics, and medical devices
resulting from laboratory studies to patients. NIH has published Research Methods Resources to help
investigators satisfy the agency's clinical research requirements for randomized trials or to deliver other
scientific interventions to groups. In addition, NIH launched a series of initiatives to increase the
accountability and transparency of clinical research, targeting key points that include design and
methods. These include Basic Experimental Studies Involving Humans, and has criteria for interventions,
measurement, and study design. To improve stewardship over clinical trials, NIH launched the Clinical
Trial Definition which advances the design, conduct, and oversight of clinical trials and elevates
transparency and accountability.
The best available scientific research and data is used by CDC to develop strategies, guidance and
recommendations used by partners in practice to promote and ensure a healthy population, to
determine the best course of action in response to events, and to determine effectiveness of programs.
HHS also uses findings from research and evaluations to advance patient care; for example, by
determining the effectiveness of health information sites geared toward particular populations of
interest and the providers who serve them.
As a best practice, FDA issues guidance to ensure quality of research that is used to support data-
informed decision-making and provide direction for adopting appropriate methods and approaches. For
instance, FDA issued guidance in 2019 for its staff, industry, and other stakeholders on research
methods for medical product development studies that identify patients' perceptions of care. This
includes the use of quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods. For research specifically related to
radiation exposure from medical imaging, the FDA is currently developing methods to estimate the dose
reductions that can be achieved using iterative image reconstruction algorithms.
Assessment Area: Effectiveness of Evaluations, Statistics, Research and Analysis Activities
Effectiveness is described in OMB Circular A-11 as "the extent to which the agency evaluations and
evidence activities meet the needs of the various divisions within the agency and appropriately balance
Page 14 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
across those needs." The priority learning questions in the HHS Evidence-Building Plan and Annual
Evaluation Plan describe the needs of the agency, and together, these plans provide a comprehensive
description of the planned and ongoing efforts in HHS to build evidence relevant to those questions and
needs. Of the five priority areas for the Department, the activities are meeting the needs of the
divisions and programs for four of them: Health Care, Human Services, Research & Evidence, and Public
Health. Only a limited number of activities in the list above address the fifth priority area of
Management.
Evaluation
Priority questions in Health Care are directed towards the impact of HHS programs and policies that
expand access to quality health care coverage and services, as well as the effectiveness of HHS programs
and policies in expanding access to health services and on strengthening the primary and preventive
care workforce. NIH's Evaluation of the program Enhancing the Diversity of the NIH-Funded Workforce
will assess transformative and innovative approaches to strengthening institutions and faculty dedicated
to the engagement, training, and retention of diverse biomedical scientists.
For priority questions in Public Health, evaluation activities are aimed at safeguarding and improving
national and global health conditions and outcomes. This includes examining HHS' capabilities to
predict, prepare for, and respond to public health emergencies and threats in the nation, such as ASPE's
evaluation of the effects of COVID-19 on residents in long-term care facilities to better prepare for
future long-term care needs. Priority questions in Human Services focus on strengthening social well-
being, equity, and economic resilience.
ACF's OPRE research and evaluations are targeted to multiple program areas that address these
questions. For example, the Evaluation of Employment Coaching for TANF and Related Populations
evaluates interventions that apply coaching practices to promote job entry and retention among TANF
populations and other low-income individuals. The Building Evidence on Employment Strategies for Low-
Income Families Project targets priority questions in Human Services, and strengthens our
understanding of effective interventions aimed at supporting low-income individuals to find jobs,
advance in the labor market, and improve their economic security. In addition, addressing child well-
being is part of the Human Services priority, and includes the Expanding Evidence on Replicable
Recovery and Reunification Interventions for Families evaluation. This evaluation replicates an
intervention wherein parents engaged in the child welfare system due to substance use disorders may
access recovery coaches. Previous research showed that parents who worked with recovery coaches
had more favorable parental recovery outcomes and shortened time to reunification.2 See:
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/opre/R3-recovery-coaching-march-2021.pdf
Evaluation activities conducted by CMS address priority questions in Health Care and Human Services.
CMS is evaluating the Maternal Opioid Misuse (MOM) Model, a program to address fragmentation in
the care of pregnant and postpartum Medicaid beneficiaries with opioid use disorder (OUD) through
state-driven transformation of the delivery system surrounding this vulnerable population. By
2 Francis, Kimberly, Jessica Thornton Walker, Jill Hamadyk, and Sandra Jo Wilson (2021). Recovery Coaching
Interventions for Families Involved with the Child Welfare System: Moving Toward Evidence-Based Practices, OPRE
Report 2021-53. Washington, DC: Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation, Administration for Children and
Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Page 15 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
supporting the coordination of clinical care and the integration of other services critical for health,
wellbeing, and recovery, the MOM model has the potential to improve quality of care and reduce costs
for mothers and infants.
HHS evaluations are meeting the needs of the various divisions, offices, and programs across the
Department. Most are targeting questions in the priority areas of Health Care, Public Health, Human
Services, and Research and Evidence, with fewer activities focused on Management. However, the
substance of the activities addressing questions in the Management area directly focus on advancing
strategic management to build trust, transparency, and accountability, such as SAMHSA's review of
Performance Measurement for their discretionary grants that will assess outcome measures used for
multiple grant programs and ASPR's evaluation of the supply chain data feeds for their Supply Chain
Control Tower to support all-hazard's response beyond COVID.
Statistics
HHS' statistical activities directly inform priority areas of Public Health, Health Care, Human Services,
and Research and Evidence. Statistical data collections such as NCHS' National Health Interview Survey
and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey provide accurate and objective information
on health insurance coverage, access to care, utilization of services, health behaviors, and medical
conditions, all of which target priority questions in the areas above. Statistics produced from the
National Vital Statistics System effectively meet the needs of multiple divisions, offices, and programs
and provide data to answer priority questions in Public Health and Health Care. For example, mortality
statistics provided early warnings of the drug overdose crisis and are used to inform programs regarding
the specific drugs involved in drug overdose deaths and where these deaths occur. During the COVID-19
pandemic, COVID-related death data have provided critical information to guide decision-making and to
inform programs and mitigation strategies. And the Vital Statistics Rapid Release Program effectively
addresses priority questions in Public Health, Health Care, and Research and Evidence, with innovative
methods that provide early release of provisional estimates of COVID-related deaths as well as excess
mortality from the virus. The independence of the statistical agency and the principles of scientific
integrity that guide its activities support the Research and Evidence area and goals of restoring trust in
government by providing statistical information that is free from undue or inappropriate influence.
Statistical activities conducted by HHS' recognized statistical unit, SAMHSA's CBHSQ, such as the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health meet the needs of different divisions and address priority areas
in Health Care, including the extent to which HHS programs and policies strengthen and expand access
to mental health and substance use disorder treatment and recovery services for individuals and
families. Statistical programs such as the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey conducted by the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) provide statistical information to address priority areas of
Health Care, Public Health, and Research and Evidence. Other statistical programs across HHS conduct
statistical activities that effectively meet the needs of the programs and divisions which they serve.
Research and Analysis
Priority questions from the Evidence-Building Plan and Annual Evaluation Plan in the area of Research
and Evidence focus on restoring trust and accelerating advancements in science and research for all.
HHS has a number of activities that address the priority questions in this area. The NIH Strategic
Response to COVID-19 has the priorities of advancing research to improve detection, supporting
Page 16 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
research to advance treatment, and accelerating research to improve prevention. Key areas of scientific
inquiry in disease detection, transmission, prevention, mitigation, and social and behavioral sciences are
included in the CDC Public Health Science Agenda for COVID-19. Efforts under this agenda will focus on
surveillance, epidemiologic investigations, mathematical modeling; the development of laboratory
diagnostics, the protection of patients and workers, and community mitigation strategies.
Research and evaluation activities conducted by the National Institute on Disability, Independent Living,
and Rehabilitation Research (NIDIRR) in the Administration for Community Living (ACL) address priority
questions in Human Services, Health Care, Public Health, and Research and Evidence. In addition, ACL's
Disability and Rehabilitation Research Program conducts research and demonstration projects to
maximize the full inclusion and integration of individuals with disabilities into society, employment,
independent living, and family support; to promote economic and social self-sufficiency; and to improve
the effectiveness of services authorized under the Rehabilitation Act. These activities inform the
Department's priority questions in several areas: Human Services, Public Health, Research and Evidence,
and Health Care.
In addition, ASPE, in partnership with HHS agencies and offices, coordinates a portfolio of
intradepartmental projects that build data capacity for conducting patient centered outcomes research
(PCOR). This research is designed to produce new scientific evidence that informs and supports health
care decisions, and addresses priority areas for research and evidence, effectively meeting the needs of
multiple divisions within HHS.
Assessment Area: Independence of Evaluations, Statistics, Research and Analysis
Activities
OMB Circular A-11 indicates that the assessment of independence of agency activities is to describe the
extent to which the activities being carried out are free from bias and inappropriate influence. The
independence of federal evaluations, statistics, research, and analysis is supported in HHS by the 2009
Presidential Memorandum on Scientific Integrity, the 2010 Office of Science and Technology Policy
Memo on Scientific Integrity, and HHS Scientific Integrity Policies and Principles. In addition, the 2021
Presidential Memorandum Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and Evidence-
Based Policymaking affirms and lends further weight to well-
established principles of scientific integrity that include
independence from undue influence and apply to agency
GUIDANCE FOR INDEPENDENCE
evaluations, statistics, research, and analysis.
OMB Program Evaluation
Evaluation
Standards and Best Practices
Independence is one of the standards required in M-20-12
Principles & Practices for Federal
for federal program evaluations. Federal agencies should
Statistical Agencies
enable evaluators to, and evaluators should, operate with an
Scientific Integrity Principles
appropriate level of independence from programmatic,
regulatory, policymaking, and stakeholder activities. The
Presidential Memos on Scientific
implementation of evaluation activities, including how
Integrity
Page 17 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
evaluators are selected and operate, should be appropriately insulated from political and other undue
influences that may affect their objectivity, impartiality, and professional judgement. One practice that
supports this independence is the establishment and maintenance of policies and procedures to ensure
that evaluation offices and staff have authority to approve evaluation designs and methods and release
evaluation findings to safeguard against bias. The HHS Evaluation Policy affirms the OMB standards and
supports independence as a standard for evaluation activities.
Within HHS, certain operating divisions have established evaluation offices with clear roles and
responsibilities that operate independently from other agency functions such as regulatory, program,
and policymaking activities. Examples include CDC's Program Performance and Evaluation Office
(PPEO), ACF's Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation (OPRE), FDA's Office of Planning and
Evaluation, HRSA's Office of Planning, Analysis and Evaluation (OPAE), IHS' Division of Planning,
Evaluation, and Research (DPER), ACL's Center for Policy and Evaluation, NIH's Office of Evaluation,
Performance, and Reporting (OEPR), and SAMHSA's Office of Evaluation (OE). These offices, centers, and
divisions share evaluation standards and best practices and work to improve evaluation activities both
within their respective OpDivs and across HHS.
For example, ACF's OPRE has noted that independence is a core principle of evaluation and that
evaluation functions must be insulated from undue influence and bias, in actuality as well as in
appearance. To promote this, ACF protects independence in the design, conduct, and analysis of
evaluations by conducting evaluations through the competitive award of grants and contracts to
external experts who are free from conflicts of interest. The director of OPRE reports directly to the
Assistant Secretary for Children and Families and has authority to approve the design of evaluation
projects and analysis plans and approve, release, and disseminate evaluation reports (79 FR 51574).
Statistics
Statistical agencies and recognized statistical units embrace a common set of professional standards and
operational practices designed to ensure the quality, integrity, and credibility of their statistical
activities. Implementation of these professional standards involves a wide range of managerial and
technical challenges. Practical guidance to accomplish this is found in the National Academies' Principles
and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency. One of the five principles is Independence from Undue
Political and Other External Influence in developing, producing, and disseminating statistics. These
principles, in tandem with other documents such as OMB's Statistical Policy Directive No. 4, provide
direction and guidance for the actual and perceived independence of statistical agencies to ensure
public trust in the credibility, accuracy, and integrity of federal statistics.
Federal statistical agencies and recognized statistical units must function in an environment that is
clearly separate and autonomous from the other administrative, regulatory, law enforcement, or policy-
making activities within their respective Departments. In HHS, consistent with its authorities, NCHS
conducts statistical activities autonomously in terms of determining what information to collect and
process, the physical security and information systems security employed to protect confidential data,
which methods to apply in their estimation procedures and data analysis, when and how to store and
disseminate their statistical products, and which staff to select to join the agency. In these ways, NCHS
assures the independence of the design, collection, production, analysis, and dissemination of health
statistics.
Page 18 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Research and Analysis
Independence is a fundamental principle of scientific integrity; research and analysis must be free from
bias and undue influence. Several HHS OpDivs have long-standing and well-established research
programs and have policies and procedures to ensure independence of these activities. Among other
agencies, NIH, CDC, and FDA are examples of OpDivs with such policies and procedures due to their
science-related missions and mandates.
One example is the FDA's support for biomedical and behavioral research to provide scientific data to
inform regulation of tobacco products to protect public health. This research requires independence and
objectivity as research results are expected to generate findings and data that are directly relevant in
informing the FDA's regulation of the manufacture, distribution, and marketing of tobacco products to
protect public health. Other FDA research is conducted in collaboration with NIH and aims to increase
and maintain a strong cohort of talented, independent investigators conducting research that will
inform the development and evaluation of tobacco product regulations. FDA partners with NIH and CDC
in support of independent research where the results will be to the benefit of each agency.
Requirements for independence in research are found in each agency's scientific integrity policies and
procedures.
In addition to scientific integrity policies, certain standard of conduct and procedures ensure
independence in research and analysis. NIH delineates the roles of extramural staff members to avoid
conflicts. As a result, no member of the NIH extramural staff may serve as a reviewer on an NIH review
panel, and no member of the NIH review staff may participate in review functions and portfolio
management in the same scientific area. Furthermore, input from individual extramural research staff
into the process is restricted: an individual may not participate in both an application's initial peer
review and advisory council review.
Further, NIH requires grantees to establish safeguards to prevent employees, consultants, members of
governing bodies, and others who may be involved in grant-supported activities from using their
positions for purposes that are, or give the appearance of being, motivated by a desire for private or
financial gain for themselves or others, such as those with whom they have family, business, or other
ties. These safeguards must be reflected in written standards of conduct.
Since the passage of the Evidence Act, evaluation, research, and analysis activities have been highlighted
for their value and critical agency functions and have emphasized the application of standards and the
principles of scientific integrity in evidence-building activities for all HHS operating divisions. For
example, HRSA's Rural Health Research Center program conducts research to better understand
problems faced by rural communities and to inform population health improvement efforts, including
health care access and delivery. Entities that are funded under this program apply principles of scientific
integrity in their research efforts.
The Indian Health Service (IHS) has partnered with NIH on the Native American Research Centers for
Health program to accomplish scientific goals and conduct biomedical, behavioral, and health services
research in partnership with American Indian/Alaska Native tribes or tribally-based organizations.
Multiple partners support, review, and oversee these efforts to ensure independence and promote the
integrity of the research.
Page 19 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency support the needs of various divisions within the agency (5 USC $306(a)(9)(B))
As described above, the evaluation, research, and analysis efforts of HHS address the needs of various
divisions, offices, and programs in terms of quality and effectiveness. HHS supports quality through the
development of policies and standards such as the HHS Information Quality Act guidelines, the HHS
Evaluation Policy, and research and analysis quality standards. The agency supports effectiveness at
HHS through data source development and policy, legal, and administrative support.
The statistical activities of NCHS, for example, directly support the statistical data needs of divisions
across HHS. The statistical data from NCHS has supported research and analysis across HHS divisions
and largely meets the needs of those divisions. NCHS has collaborations and partnerships across HHS in
order to coordinate the collection of information to meet a variety of information needs. For instance,
the list of activities and operations that HHS is currently evaluating and analyzing includes several
statistical collections with input from multiple Institutes within NIH and Centers within CDC and FDA on
topics such as tobacco and tobacco-related product use, nutrition, prescription drugs, environmental
exposures, medical conditions, and health service utilization. Efforts are underway with the goal
improving timeliness and specificity-including geographic and demographic specificity-of key data
sets. Resource constraints limit the extent to which data sets can be improved over time.
The staff divisions within the Office of the Secretary of HHS, provide a great deal of support to OpDivs
through rigorous evaluation, research, and analysis efforts. The HHS Office of the General Counsel's
support includes legal analyses of guidance, regulation, and legislation. The Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Financial Resources (ASFR) provides analytical support and recommendations to the HHS
Secretary in the areas of budget, performance, and program policy. The Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Administration (ASA) conducts evaluations of business practices. The Office of the Assistant
Secretary of Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) provides policy research, evaluation, and economic analysis
to support the Department. The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) conducts analyses and
evaluations in its oversight role of promoting the economy, efficiency, effectiveness, and integrity of
HHS programs.
Departmental analysis laid out in the Strategic Plan and Evidence-Building Plan support and coordinate
efforts of divisions in achieving key priorities of HHS. Agency level evaluations, research, and analysis
efforts also support cross-cutting issues, major department-level goals, and time sensitive priority
issues. Long-term goals are identified through HHS' strategic planning and Evidence Building Plan
processes. Every four years, HHS updates its strategic plan, which describes its work to address complex,
multifaceted, and evolving health and human services issues.
An agency strategic plan is one of three main elements required by the Government Performance and
Results Act (GPRA) of 1993 (Pub. L. 103-62) and the GPRA Modernization Act of 2010 - PDF (Pub. L. 111-
352). HHS' strategic plan defines its mission, its goals, and the means by which it will measure its
progress in addressing specific national problems over a four-year period. OMB Circular A-11,
Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, Part 6, Strategic Plans, Annual Performance
Plans, Performance Reviews, and Annual Program Performance Reports provide guidance on the
strategic planning process. In addition to the four-year strategic plan, the agency sets additional, shorter
Page 20 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
term goals. In particular, HHS' Agency Priority Goals are performance measures monitored by the
Department that support the Department's Priority Goals. These goals are a set of ambitious but
realistic performance objectives that the Department will work to achieve within a 24-month period.
Agency Priority Goals support and align with the Strategic Goals and Objectives of the HHS Strategic
Plan. The GPRA Modernization Act requires the inclusion of these Priority Goals in the Department's
Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan.
In addition, the activities listed in the HHS Evidence-Building Plan and Annual Evaluation Plan target key
questions in the five priority areas for the Department: Health Care, Public Health, Human Services,
Research and Evidence, and Management. The table below provides information on the activities for
these priority areas, and some activities address multiple priority areas.
FY22-26 HHS Strategic Goals
Activities
from Plans
Health Care: Protect and Strengthen Equitable Access to High Quality and Affordable
25
Health Care
Public Health: Safeguard and Improve National and Global Health Conditions and
16
Outcomes
Human Services: Strengthen Social Well-Being, Equity, and Economic Resilience
11
Research and Evidence: Restore Trust and Accelerate Advancement in Science and
18
Research for All
Management: Advance Strategic Management to Build Trust, Transparency, and
10
Accountability
Time sensitive priority issues are also addressed at the agency level on an ad hoc basis. For example,
during the COVID-19 public health emergency, ASPE has coordinated research to better understand
vaccine hesitancy. This research has supported cross-departmental best practices and efforts to support
vaccine access and community health and stop the spread of COVID-19. Need for ad hoc agency level
work is identified by department leadership or brought forward by divisions in coordination forums. The
HHS Evidence & Evaluation Council and Data Council provide two such forums. In each of these forums,
division leaders and staff can identify cross-cutting issues. When sufficient need is identified, these
Councils form workgroups to address those issues.
There is still opportunity to improve coordination to ensure that evaluation, research, and analysis
efforts are undertaken when they are appropriate and that those efforts meet the needs of divisions.
The structure of HHS into operating and staff divisions with varied missions does not facilitate easy
coordination and identification of cross-cutting challenges. The strategic planning, evidence building,
planning, and agency forums provide avenues to support divisions. However, additional resources or
pathways would be beneficial in identifying division needs for agency-level evaluations, research, and
analysis. Further, agency-level support and initiatives have, at times, lacked a process that allows for
divisions to provide feedback on the extent to which agency level support and initiatives have supported
their needs. All three Evidence Act officials expressed during interviews that there is room for
improvement in terms of the agency supporting division needs.
Page 21 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
The extent to which the evaluation, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency address an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational learning,
ongoing program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency
and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability (5 USC
$306(a)(9)(C))
The areas of organizational learning, ongoing program management, performance management,
strategic management, interagency and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and
accountability are typically managed through a number of separate processes.
Organizational learning and ongoing program management are intertwined and occur throughout the
organization as each division, office, team, and individual must balance their time and energy between
managing the current project and considering organizational improvement to better achieve larger
goals. For example, a team that is working to reduce obesity must balance staff and time between
implementing programs to combat obesity and designing new programs, policies, or organizational
structure that could improve the team's ability to combat obesity in the future. The balance that is
achieved between organizational learning and ongoing program management varies greatly across
divisions, offices, individuals, and time.
The performance management process at HHS consists of both staff performance and agency
performance. Staff performance management occurs through individual performance reviews and
annual satisfaction surveys. Agency performance is measured most directly through the performance
tracking of performance goals and Agency Priority Goals through the strategic planning process as
required by the GPRA Modernization Act of 2010 and related guidance from OMB.
Strategic management at HHS consists of identifying agency objectives and designing a strategy to
achieve those objectives. This process at HHS is primarily conducted through the development of the
HHS strategic plan. The strategic planning process at HHS is governed by GPRA, the GPRA
Modernization Act, and OMB A-11 and is coordinated by the HHS strategic planning team within ASPE.
Interagency and private sector coordination vary greatly across HHS. Interagency coordination occurs at
a variety of levels through a variety of avenues including: interagency bodies such as the Federal
Committee on Statistical Methodology (FCSM) and the Federal Health IT Coordinating Council,
communities of practice (some of which are facilitated through OMB MAX communities), interagency
working groups convened by the Whitehouse, interagency agreements, and informal relationships
developed over time. Private sector coordination can occur through federal advisory committees such as
the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS). It can also occur through division
developed or congressionally mandated processes. The nature and form of private sector coordination
depend greatly on division mission. For example, NIH interacts with private universities through grants
and FDA regulates products developed or produced by pharmaceutical and food companies.
Objective internal oversight at HHS is conducted by the Office of Inspector General through audits,
evaluations, and investigations, and external oversight is conducted by the Government Accountability
Office, OMB and Congress.
Page 22 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Accountability at HHS is ensured through internal agency requirements to ensure accountability in terms
of the effective use of tax dollars. Each year HHS publishes an agency financial report in line with OMB
Circular A-136. This report provides fiscal and summary performance results that enable the President,
Congress, and the American people to assess HHS' annual accomplishments. HHS-funded grants include
fiduciary responsibilities. Reporting requirements including performance and progress reports are
required for any data collection covered by the Paperwork Reduction Act for the purposes of monitoring
and accountability.
As highlighted above there is a balance struck between ongoing program management and
organizational learning. However, generally these processes are not balanced against each other as
these eight processes cited together in the Evidence Act are largely conducted through separate work
streams at HHS. As such, there is a very limited extent to which the evaluation, research, and analysis
efforts and related activities of the agency address any balance between needs related to organizational
learning, ongoing program management, performance management, strategic management,
interagency and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability.
The extent to which the agency uses methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate
to agency divisions and corresponding research questions being addressed, including an
appropriate combination of formative and summative evaluation research and analysis
approaches (5 USC $306(a)(9)(D)
As noted earlier, there are existing Federal standards, practices, procedures, and requirements for HHS'
evaluation, research, and statistical activities that support consistent and high-quality evidence-building
efforts. This is particularly true for statistical and research activities that have long-standing, established
requirements and include Federal, agency, and professional standards and practices. Further, each of
three Evidence Act officials stated in interviews that HHS is particularly strong in terms of using methods
and combinations of methods that are appropriate to agency divisions and corresponding research
questions being addressed.
HHS employs a set of interrelated policies, standards, and guidelines to ensure that methods and
combinations of methods used for evaluation, statistics, research, and analysis are appropriate to the
questions and purpose to which these activities are addressed. The Evaluation Policy for HHS affirms
the commitment to high-quality systematic evaluations and incorporates the standards for program
evaluations issued by OMB in M-20-12. HHS programs must adhere to these standards to promote the
quality, credibility, objectivity, and utility of evaluation activities.
HHS applies a broad range of methodological approaches for its program evaluations, statistical
activities, research, and analysis. Many of these approaches include those referenced in the Presidential
Memorandum on Scientific Integrity and Evidence-Based Policymaking, such as: pilot projects,
randomized controlled trials, survey research, and research and analysis of linked records, such as
administrative data and national surveys. The selection of methods and combinations of methods varies
depending upon the research questions and the purpose and use of the evaluations and activities.
Programs are guided by professional standards and best practices referenced in federal guidelines, the
Page 23 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
publications from National Academy of Sciences, as well as professional associations such as the
American Evaluation Association and the American Statistical Association.
In any methodological approach that is applied, HHS emphasizes the need for rigor, requiring adherence
to standards for quality and widely-accepted scientific principles. To support the need for rigor,
evaluations, research, and statistical activities are conducted by staff that are highly qualified with
appropriate credentials, education, skills, and experience in the methods used.
Program Evaluations: Certain operating divisions within HHS are widely recognized for leadership in
conducting rigorous program evaluation and evidence-building, and that reputation is well-deserved.
These OpDivs have well-established evaluation programs, strengthened by staff that are highly trained
evaluation professionals. Examples include OPRE in ACF, CDC's PPEO, and NIH's OEPR.
Statistical Activities: Major statistical activities for HHS are conducted by NCHS, the principal federal
statistical agency for health. The Director of NCHS is the designated HHS Statistical Official and plays a
key role in assuring that the Department's statistical activities are high-quality, unbiased, objective,
timely, and relevant. This agency leads the Department in statistical expertise, conducting credible and
accurate statistical activities using sound and appropriate methods. NCHS employs specific practices to
ensure the application of appropriate methods, specifically adhering to:
OMB Statistical Policy Directives and Standards
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
Information Quality Guidelines
Scientific Methods to Ensure Data Quality and Integrity
In addition to NCHS, the Department has a recognized statistical unit, CBHSQ in SAMHSA, as well as a
number of components and programs that conduct statistical activities. This includes many of the
Centers and Offices within CDC and Institutes, Offices, and Centers within NIH.
The extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present within the agency to include
personnel and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities,
disseminating best practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback (5
USC $306(a)(9)(E))
To address the extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present in HHS, findings from the
survey of senior leaders were incorporated with work conducted by the HHS Data Council as well as the
Office of the Chief Data Officer.
The HHS Data Council established a Data-Oriented Workforce Subcommittee (DOWS) to assess and
make recommendations on workforce priorities in the 2018 HHS Data Strategy: Enhancing the HHS
Evidence-Based Portfolio. The Subcommittee was focused on activities to understand and enhance the
data science capacity of HHS' workforce, including the identification of training opportunities for existing
staff, recruitment strategies and tools to hire new staff, and retention and succession planning
strategies to sustain the data science workforce. This work complemented other activities that were
undertaken to address components of the Federal Data Strategy (FDS). Under Action 4 of the FDS, each
federal agency is to assess the data skills of its workforce to identify opportunities to improve those
Page 24 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
skills. To meet this requirement, the HHS Office of the Chief Data Officer conducted an assessment
across the Department in March, 2021. The approach used for the assessment consisted of a
questionnaire as well as interviews with the senior leaders in the HHS Operating Divisions, and questions
were targeted on the data skills of the HHS workforce. The questionnaire included a list of data skills
that were grouped into five separate categories: foundational skills, data operations and management
skills, technical skills, data analysis skills, and advanced analytic skills.
Implementation of the Evidence Act to expand research and evaluation capacity also presents some
significant challenges in terms of resources, particularly budget, staff, and technology. Additional
resources will be necessary in order to execute all of the requirements of the Act, and interviews with
the three designated officials identified resources needs for evaluation and evidence-building activities,
open data, and the presumption of accessibility for statistical agencies to obtain data. For example,
requirements under Title III incur new budget and staffing needs for statistical agencies and recognized
statistical units to obtain data, conduct comprehensive risk assessments and expand access to secure
data covered under the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA).
The extent to which the agency has the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to
develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-
day operations (5 USC $306(a)(9)(F))
HHS provides a variety of tools and resources that are available to divisions across the Department. The
office of the CDO provides resources to help agencies improve individual capacity for data science
including the HHS Data Camp. For example, NCHS has disseminated information through the HHS Data
Council on the Data Protection Toolkit released by the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology.
The toolkit provides resources, methods, and approaches for promoting access to data while protection
confidentiality, assessing data quality, statistical disclosure techniques and assessing disclosure risk.
Best practices, case studies, tools, and other content to help programs increase access to data while
ensuring appropriate protections for privacy and confidentiality. CDC's PPEO has made evaluation
resources available to the public through the following link: https://www.cdc.gov/eval/index.htm
including information on evaluation events and trainings, evaluation documents, workbooks, and tools,
and the CDC framework for evaluations. CDC also has an Evaluation Fellowship Program to expand the
capacity of CDC programs to conduct evaluations and increase their usefulness and impact. The OPRE,
within ACF, disseminates information on ACF's Evaluation Policy, evaluation conferences and meetings,
ACF's Research and Evaluation Agenda, as well as publications and tools to inform and improve methods
for evaluation and research activities. Moreover, resources and tools to improve research and analysis
are available from NIH (https://www.nih.gov/research-training/research-resources),which provides
literature, library resources, clinical registries, and links to information on training opportunities in
disease prevention, research methods, clinical research training, and other areas.
Additionally, the Statistical Officer, Chief Data Officer, and Evaluation Officer each play crucial
coordination roles including through leadership and support of the Data Governance Board, the Data
Council, and Evidence and Evaluation Council, which support divisions in sharing best practices and
Page 25 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
raising concerns and barriers to conducting evaluation, research, and analysis. Each officer also provides
the opportunity for technical consultations, though the extent and frequency of consultations are
limited by staffing constraints.
Historically, beyond coordination, there has not been significant investment in HHS-level support for
evaluation, research, and analysis at the division level. Data infrastructure has typically been developed
at the department level, with agency wide infrastructure limited to Enterprise Human Capital
Management, HHS Protect, and the Access Management System.
Appendix A: List of Activities Policies and Requirements
Activities with an asterisk indicate those that are included in the HHS FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building
Plan and/or FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan.
Title
Agency
Activity
Evaluation of Employment Coaching for TANF and Related Populations
ACF
Evaluation
Evaluation of the Child Welfare Capacity Building Collaborative*
ACF
Evaluation
Building Evidence on Employment Strategies for Low Income Families*
ACF
Evaluation
Head Start Family and Child Experiences Survey
ACF
Statistical
Early Head Start Family and Child Experiences Survey
ACF
Statistical
National Evaluation of the 2nd Generation of Health Profession Opportunity Grants
ACF
Evaluation
Tribal Evaluation of the 2nd Generation of Health Profession Opportunity Grants
ACF
Evaluation
Sexual Risk Avoidance Education National Evaluation
ACF
Evaluation
Multi-Site Implementation Evaluation of Tribal Home Visiting
ACF
Evaluation
Expanding Evidence on Replicable Recovery and Reunification Interventions for
ACF
Evaluation
Families
Human Trafficking Policy and Research Analysis Project
ACF
Research
Building Capacity to Evaluate Child Welfare Community Collaborations to Strengthen
ACF
Evaluation
and Preserve Families
Formative Evaluation of Family Unification Program Vouchers for Youth
ACF
Evaluation
Transitioning Out of Foster Care
ASPR emPOWER Program*
ASPR
Analysis
Page 26 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
ASPE COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy and Confidence*
ASPE
Research
ASPE Evaluation of the Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic
ASPE
Evaluation
Demonstration*
HRSA Maternal Health Portfolio Evaluation
HRSA
Evaluation
HRSA National Healthy Start Evaluation and Quality Assurance*
HRSA
Evaluation
HRSA Autism CARES Act Initiative Evaluation
HRSA
Evaluation
HRSA Bureau of Health Workforce Substance Use Disorder Evaluation
HRSA
Evaluation
HRSA Rural Maternity and Obstetrics Management Strategies Program Evaluation
HRSA
Evaluation
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program Special Programs of National Significance*
HRSA
Evaluation
Behavioral Health Workforce Supply
HRSA
Research
Evaluation of the Maternal and Child Health Bureau Pediatric Mental Health Care
HRSA
Evaluation
Access and Screening and Treatment for Maternal Depression and Related
Behavioral Disorders Program Project
Teaching Health Center Graduate Medical Education Program Cost Evaluation
HRSA
Evaluation
HRSA AIDS Education and Training Centers Evaluation Activities
HRSA
Evaluation
Evaluation of the Enhancing Diversity of the NIH-funded Workforce Program
HRSA
Evaluation
Impact of Clinical Research Training and Medical Education at the Clinical Center on
NIH
Evaluation
Physician Careers in Academia and Clinical Research
All of Us Research Program
NIH
Research
NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research
NIH
Research
NIH Strategic Response to COVID-19
NIH
Research
NIH Cancer Moonshot Assessment*
NIH
Evaluation
NIH Environmental Influences on Child Health Outcomes (ECHO) Program*
NIH
Research
Evaluating the Implementation of Products to Help Learning Health Systems Use
AHRQ
Evaluation
Findings from AHRQ Evidence Reports
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Household Component and Medical Provider
AHRQ
Statistical
Component
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey - Insurance Component
AHRQ
Statistical
Questionnaire and Data Collection Testing, Evaluation, and Research for the Agency
AHRQ
Statistical
for Healthcare Quality and Research
Page 27 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Evaluation of Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Trust Fund - Training Program
AHRQ
Evaluation
Evaluating the Implementation of PCOR to Increase Referral, Enrollment, and
AHRQ
Evaluation
Retention through Automatic Referral to Cardiac Rehabilitation with Care
Coordinator
Evaluating and Implementing the Six Building Blocks Team Approach to Improve
AHRQ
Evaluation
Opioid Management in Primary Care
Outcome Measure Harmonization and Data Infrastructure for Patient Centered
AHRQ
Research
Outcomes Research in Depression
Evaluation of the SHARE Approach Model
AHRQ
Evaluation
Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey
CMS
Statistical
CMS Program Statistics
CMS
Statistical
CMS Actuarial Studies
CMS
Statistical
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers & Systems
CMS
Statistical
Evaluation of Learning Health Systems K12 Training Program
AHRQ
Evaluation
ACL National Survey of Older Americans Act Participants
ACL
Statistical
ACL Outcome Evaluation of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program
ACL
Evaluation
ASPR Supply Chain Control Tower*
ASPR
Evaluation
ASPR Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority Portfolio Review*
ASPR
Evaluation
ONC Evaluation of the Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement*
ONC
Evaluation
FDA Food Safety Dashboard
FDA
Evaluation
FDA Opioid Systems Modeling Effort*
FDA
Research
National HIV Prevention Program Monitoring and Evaluation
CDC
Evaluation
CDC National Youth Tobacco Survey
CDC
Statistical
CDC Model Performance Evaluation Program for Mycobacterium Tuberculosis and
CDC
Evaluation
Nontuberculous Mycobacteria Drug Susceptibility Testing
Formative and Summative Evaluation of the National Diabetes Prevention Program
CDC
Evaluation
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System
CDC
Statistical
Page 28 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
CDC
Statistical
CDC Extended Evaluation of the National Tobacco Prevention and Control Public
CDC
Evaluation
Education Campaign
CDC Public Health Science Agenda for COVID-19
CDC
Research
Epidemiologic Study of Health Effects Associated with Low Pressure Events in
CDC
Research
Drinking Water Distribution Systems
Evaluation of Medication-Assisted Treatment for Opioid Use Disorders Study
CDC
Evaluation
CDC Assessment of Ill Worker Policies Study
CDC
Evaluation
CDC Assessment of the Cancer Survivorship Demonstration Project
CDC
Evaluation
The World Trade Center Health Program: Impact Assessment and Strategic Planning
CDC
Evaluation
for Translational Research
Evaluation of TransLife Center: A Locally-Developed Combination Prevention
CDC
Evaluation
Intervention for Transgender Women at High Risk of HIV Infection
Evaluating the Implementation and Impact of an Opioid Medication Management
CDC
Evaluation
Program in a Hospital Discharge Setting to Reduce Falls in Older Adults
CDC Evaluation of STEADI Older Adult Fall Prevention Initiative in a Primary Care
CDC
Evaluation
Setting
CDC Cross-Site Program Implementation Evaluation of Overdose Data to Action
CDC
Evaluation
Program*
CDC Formative Research and Tool Development
CDC
Research
National Health Interview Survey
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
National Ambulatory Health Care Data
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
National Hospital Care Survey
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
National Survey of Family Growth
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
National Vital Statistics System
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
Vital Statistics Rapid Release Natality and Mortality Estimates
CDCNCHS
Statistical
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project
AHRQ
Statistical
Provisional Death Counts for COVID-19
CDC/NCHS
Statistical
Developmental Studies to Improve the National Health Care Surveys
CDC/NCHS
Research
Page 29 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Comparing Blood Pressure Values Obtained by Two Different Protocols: National
CDC/NCHS
Evaluation
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
Unsuitable Underlying Causes-of-Death for Assessing the Quality of Cause-of-Death
CDC/NCHS
Analysis
Reporting
Comparative Analysis of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
CDC/NCHS
Analysis
Public-use and Restricted-use Linked Mortality Files
CDC WISEWOMAN National Program Evaluation
CDC
Evaluation
National Survey on Drug Use and Health
SAMHSA
Statistical
SAMHSA Strategic Prevention Framework for Prescription Drugs*
SAMHSA
Evaluation
Page 30 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Appendix B: Policies and Requirements Pertaining to Assessment Areas
Documents that provide or inform a common foundation for agency evaluations, statistics,
research, and analysis are listed in the table below. Taken as a whole, these complementary
requirements contribute to an integrative framework guiding the conduct of Federal
evaluations, statistics, research, and analysis to ensure quality, appropriate methods,
effectiveness, and independence.
Assessment
Assessment Activities
Areas
Statistics
Evaluation
Research
Analysis
Coverage
Activities and operations
Activities and operations
Activities and
Activities and
of the agency currently
of the agency that are
operations of the
operations of the
being evaluated and
currently being
agency currently being
agency currently being
analyzed.
evaluated and analyzed.
evaluated and analyzed.
evaluated and
analyzed.
Quality
-Statement of
-Published policies and
-HHS Policies and
-HHS Policies and
Commitment to
procedures for program
Procedures for Ensuring
Procedures for
Scientific Integrity by
evaluation [2] [3] [4]
Scientific Integrity[6
Ensuring Scientific
Principal Statistical
-OMB M-20-12
(also applies to
Integrity(7 (also
Agenciesยน
Evaluation Standards[5
Methods)
applies to Methods)
-NAS Principles &
for objectivity and
- Presidential Memo
OMB Circular A-4,
Practices for Federal
relevance
Restoring Trust Through
quality standards for
Statistical Agencies
- Presidential Memo
Scientific Integrity and
analysis used in
-IQA Guidelines for
Restoring Trust Through
Evidence-Based
regulations
Federal Quality
Scientific Integrity and
Policymaking
- Presidential Memo
standards
Evidence-Based
Restoring Trust
- Presidential Memo
Policymaking
Through Scientific
Restoring Trust Through
-HHS Evaluation Policy
Integrity and
Scientific Integrity and
Evidence-Based
Evidence-Based
Policymaking
Policymaking
Methods
-Using the Best Scientific
-OMB IQA Guidelines
-OMB IQA Guidelines
-OMB IQA Guidelines
Methods to Ensure Data
have standard for
have standard for
have standard for
Quality and Integrity
objectivity which is
objectivity which is
objectivity which is
(part of Statement
supported by using
supported by using
supported by using
above)
sound statistical and
sound statistical and
sound statistical and
-OMB IQA Guidelines
research methods
research methods
research methods
have standard for
-OMB M-19-18 Federal
-NIH Policies and
-NIH Policies and
objectivity which is
Data Strategy
Procedures for
Procedures for
supported by using
requirements for data
Promoting Scientific
Promoting Scientific
sound statistical and
quality, validation of
Integrity(9
Integrity [7]
research methods
accuracy
-Agency adherence to
-OMB M-20-12
OMB Standards and
Evaluation Standard for
Guidelines for Statistical
rigor
Surveys[8
-HHS Evaluation Policy
Effectiveness
-OMB Statistical Policy
-Published guidelines
-OMB IQA Guidelines
-OMB IQA standards
Directive No. 1:
and recommendations[12
require utility of
for utility of
Fundamental
information
information
Page 31 of 32
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES: Capacity Assessment
Responsibilities of
-OMB IQA Guidelines
disseminated by federal
disseminated by
Federal Statistical
require agencies to
agencies. Utility refers
federal agencies,
Agencies and Recognized
review information
to the usefulness of the
including information
Statistical Units[10
disseminated to ensure
information to intended
resulting from
-IQA includes standards
utility and usefulness of
users, including the
analysis. To assess
for the utility of statistics
information to intended
public. To assess utility,
utility, agencies must
disseminatedยน
users (this includes
the agency must
consider the
information on agency
consider the
perspectives of the
evaluations and their
perspective of the
public, researchers,
results)
public (e.g., solicitation
and users of the
-NAS Principles &
of public comments,
information.
Practices for Federal
public engagement)
Program Evaluation:
evaluations should
produce useful results
-OMB M-20-12
Evaluation Standard for
utility
-HHS Evaluation Policy
Independence
-NAS Federal statistical
-Evaluations that include
-OMB IQA Guidelines
-Analysis of surveys
agencies must ensure
surveys must ensure
require that agencies
must ensure authority
authority and autonomy
authority and autonomy
ensure objectivity and
and autonomy to
to determine methods,
to determine methods,
that information is
determine methods,
conduct activities, and
conduct activities, and
accurate, reliable, and
conduct activities, and
publish results[13]
publish results (OMB
unbiased.
publish results (OMB
-IQA objectivity standard
standards)
-Agency surveys must
standards)
for statistics
-OMB M-20-12
ensure authority and
-IQA standards for
disseminated
Evaluation Standard for
autonomy to determine
objectivity for
-OMB standards for
independence
methods, conduct
analyses and analytic
statistical surveys
-HHS Evaluation Policy
activities, and publish
results disseminated
(applies to all programs
results (OMB standards)
to the public
conducting statistical
surveys)
-OMB Statistical Policy
Directive 1 and 4
Page 32 of 32
