FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Background and Introduction
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act) intends to improve
decision-making for federal programs and policy development by requiring a transparent, question-
driven approach to evidence development and analysis.
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is a large, decentralized agency with 11 operating
divisions, 11 staff divisions, and 10 regional offices whose programs and policies impact the lives of
nearly every American. Understanding the evaluation, research, and analysis efforts and coordinating
plans across the Department is a significant undertaking and is conducted by the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE). In particular, through the Evaluation Officer, ASPE plays a
significant leadership role, especially for evaluation and evidence-building activities.
Evaluation and analysis provide essential evidence for HHS to understand how its programs work, for
whom, and under what circumstances. HHS builds evidence through evaluation and analysis in order to
inform decisions in budget, legislative, regulatory, strategic planning, program, and policy arenas. Given
the breadth of work supported by HHS, many evaluations and analyses are conducted each year. These
efforts range in scope, scale, design, and methodology, but all aim to understand how the effect of
programs and policies and how they can be improved.
Across HHS, evidence-building comes in many forms, including:
Program evaluations using the most rigorous designs appropriate;
Capacity-building initiatives to improve administrative data collection, accessibility, and use for
management;
Exploratory and preliminary quantitative and qualitative analysis to build evidence;
Pilots and demonstrations; and
Statistical analysis of factors related to health and human services programs and policies.
ASPE coordinates the evaluation community by regularly convening the HHS Evidence and Evaluation
Policy Council (the Council), which builds capacity by sharing best practices and promising new
approaches across HHS. The Council predates the Evidence Act and is made up of senior evaluation staff
and subject-matter experts from each agency within HHS. The Council meets monthly to address issues
related to evidence-building and evaluation policies or activities across HHS, with a recent focus on
Evidence Act implementation activities, especially within Title I. ASPE tasked the Council with developing
guidance for Operating and Staff Divisions regarding contributions to the HHS Evidence-Building and
Evaluation Plans. Based on the contributions of Operating and Staff Divisions, ASPE developed this
Evidence-Building Plan.
What is this document?
As part of the Evidence Act, HHS is required to submit "a systematic plan for identifying and addressing
policy questions relevant to the programs, policies, and regulations of the agency," or the Department
of Health and Human Services (HHS) Evidence-Building Plan (the plan), also referred to as the Learning
Agenda. All activities described in this document are subject to availability of appropriations.
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
The Evidence-Building Plan must include the following elements:
Strategic goals and objectives that the plan will address (referred to as "priority areas" in this
document)
Priority questions to be answered
Activities that the agency will engage in to address priority questions
Timing of activities
Potential data, tools, methods and analytic approaches to be used to answer priority questions
Anticipated agency-specific challenges and proposed solutions to developing evidence to
support agency priorities
This document provides a summary of these components and additional details are included in the
Appendix.
Plan Development
A subcommittee of the Council provided input on the Evidence-Building Plan development process and
helped create a template and instructions which were used to collect information on significant
evidence-building activities across the Department. Because HHS is such a large, decentralized agency,
with a vast number of evidence-building activities, Operating Divisions submitted a sample of up to 5
significant evidence-building activities, which have been compiled in this plan. This plan includes 30
examples of significant evidence-building activities from divisions including the Administration for
Children and Families (ACF), the Administration for Community Living (ACL), the Agency for Health
Research and Quality (AHRQ), the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE),
the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR), the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA).
This document details significant evidence-building activities related to each priority area that are
ongoing or will occur during FY 2023-FY 2026. Some evidence-building activities fall into multiple priority
areas and address multiple priority questions. The activities included are planned efforts that are subject
to receiving appropriate approvals and resources, and they are subject to change.
HHS organized the plan by priorities aligned with the HHS Strategic Plan Goals. These areas are:
Strategic Goal 1: Protect and Strengthen Equitable Access to High Quality and Affordable
Healthcare
Strategic Goal 2: Safeguard and Improve National and Global Health Conditions and Outcomes
Strategic Goal 3: Strengthen Social Well-being, Equity, and Economic Resilience
Strategic Goal 4: Restore Trust and Accelerate Advancements in Science and Research for All
Strategic Goal 5: Advance Strategic Management to Build Trust, Transparency, and
Accountability
The five (5) priority areas, each with associated priority questions, align with the HHS Strategic Plan FY
2022-2026 Goal and Objective Framework and are recognized administration priorities. Each set of
Page 2 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
priority questions includes a sample of planned or ongoing evidence-building activities HHS will perform
during FY 2023-2026. Given the plan encompasses a four-year period, these questions are high-level in
nature, and many may take several years and various approaches, methods, and data sources to
examine. Those priority questions without listed activities do not necessarily indicate that no activities
are planned; the number of activities described is constrained by the limit on the number of evidence-
building activities requested from Operating and Staff Divisions. In addition, new activities may be
planned and included in future HHS Annual Evaluation Plans or in subsequent updates to the HHS
Evidence-Building Plan.
The HHS Evidence-Building Plan, Annual Evaluation Plan, and Strategic Plan have been developed and
will be published on the same timeline. This poses several challenges regarding alignment, especially
because the planning teams for the three plans were simultaneously and respectively convening
stakeholders, coordinating across operating and staff divisions, executing data calls, and drafting plan
content. In particular, developing evidence-building activities takes time, and as such, many of the
activities included in this plan began development before the current HHS Strategic Plan Goal and
Objective Framework was in place. Thus, some priority questions do not have evidence-building
activities included in this plan. That may be a result of the timing of the identification of activities for
inclusion in the Evidence Building Plan. HHS will continue to assess evidence-building activities to
address the questions in the HHS Strategic Plan Goal and Objective Framework, and will plan activities to
fill knowledge gaps. The annual plan updates will include these new activities.
HHS Priority Areas for Developing and Using Evidence for Decision-Making, 2023-2026
This section details a sample of evidence-building activities related to each priority area that are ongoing
or will occur in FY 2023-2026. The activities included in this document are planned efforts that are
subject to receiving appropriate approvals and resources, and they are subject to change. Some
evaluations fall into multiple priority areas and address multiple priority questions.
Each priority area includes the priority questions and a discussion of how HHS plans to address them
during the four-year period. The separate list of evidence-building activities in the appendix includes the
sample of activities provided by divisions, including full details for each activity (timing, potential data,
tools, methods, analytic approaches, anticipated challenges and proposed solutions).
Strategic Goal 1: Protect and Strengthen Equitable Access to High Quality and Affordable Healthcare
HHS works to protect and strengthen equitable access to high quality and affordable healthcare.
Increasing choice, affordability and enrollment in high-quality healthcare coverage is a focus of the
Department's efforts in addition to reducing costs, improving quality of healthcare services, and
ensuring access to safe medical devices and drugs. HHS also works to expand equitable access to
comprehensive, community-based, innovative, and culturally-competent healthcare services while
addressing social determinants of health. The Department is driving the integration of behavioral health
into the healthcare system to strengthen and expand access to mental health and substance use
disorder treatment and recovery services for individuals and families. HHS also bolsters the health
workforce to ensure delivery of quality services and care.
Page 3 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
The activities in this priority area include increasing affordability and enrollment in high quality
healthcare coverage; equitable access to quality health-care services; integrating behavioral healthcare
into the healthcare system; expanding access to mental health and substance use disorder treatment
and recovery services; and bolstering the healthcare workforce.
Healthcare Priority Questions
How do HHS policies and programs increase choice, affordability and enrollment in high-quality
healthcare coverage?
To what extent do HHS programs and policies reduce costs and improve quality of healthcare
services?
How and to what extent do HHS programs and policies ensure access to safe medical devices and
drugs?
How do HHS programs and policies expand equitable access to comprehensive, community-based,
innovative, and culturally-competent healthcare services while addressing social determinants of
health?
How effective are HHS programs and policies at integrating behavioral health services into the
healthcare system?
To what extent do HHS programs and policies strengthen and expand access to mental health and
substance use disorder treatment and recovery services for individuals and families?
How do HHS programs and policies bolster the primary and preventive healthcare workforce to
ensure delivery of quality services and care?
Healthcare Evidence-Building Activities
Divisions across HHS are conducting evidence-building activities to address these questions, including
ASPR, ACL, CDC, CMS, NIH, and SAMHSA. These activities address various HHS programs, such as
Medicare, Medicaid, Community Health Centers, and grantmaking programs like the National Paralysis
Resource Center (NPRC). Eight identified evidence-building activities address healthcare priority
questions. Full details on these activities are provided in the appendix.
Populations impacted by the healthcare evidence-building activities contained in this plan include
mothers, individuals with disabilities (physical and cognitive disabilities), children, homeless individuals,
and those recovering from substance use disorders. Notably, there are several instances of multiple
divisions building evidence around the same populations and healthcare topics. An example includes the
NIH impact assessment for The Role of Opioids in the Treatment of Chronic Pain Pathways to Prevention
Workshop and the CMS evaluation of Maternal Opioid Misuse (MOM) Model. Additionally, some
evidence-building activities that address the healthcare priority questions may seek to improve services,
assess resource center effectiveness, advance telehealth capabilities, bolster preventative care, and
identify promising value-based insurance models.
HHS executes a broad range of evidence-building activities to answer these priority questions. Activities
include but are not limited to policy analysis, descriptive analysis, program evaluation, foundational fact-
finding, and performance measurement. Most of the activities in this plan use a combination of
methods to address a priority question. For example, using administrative data and program participant
interviews to evaluate telehealth strategies to address hypertension management and control or site
visits along with claims analysis to evaluate the Maternal Opioid Misuse Model. The activities utilize
Page 4 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
existing HHS data, including program enrollment data, administrative claims, grant applications, survey
data, and the Area Health Resource File (AHRF). They also incorporate external data such as electronic
health records, data provided by program participants, and area-level measures of social deprivation
(such as the Area Deprivation Index). Finally, activities also collect new data through surveys, interviews,
focus groups, and site visits.
Strategic Goal 2: Safeguard and Improve National and Global Health Conditions and Outcomes
HHS is dedicated to safeguarding and improving health conditions and health outcomes for everyone.
The Department improves capabilities to predict, prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from
emergencies, disasters, and threats, domestically and abroad. The Department protects individuals,
families, and communities from infectious disease and prevent non-communicable disease through the
development and equitable delivery of effective, innovative, readily available, treatments, therapeutics,
medical devices, and vaccines. HHS enhances the promotion of healthy behaviors to reduce occurrence
and disparities in preventable injury, illness, and death. The Department also mitigates the impacts of
environmental factors, including climate change, on health outcomes.
The activities in this priority area include improving capabilities related to public health emergencies and
disasters; protection against communicable and infectious disease; promotion of healthy behaviors, and
mitigation of environmental risk factors.
Public Health Priority Questions
What improvements are needed to HHS capabilities to predict, prepare for, respond to, and recover
from public health emergencies and threats in the nation and across the globe?
How effective are HHS programs and policies at protecting individuals, families, and communities
from infectious disease and preventing non-communicable disease through development and
equitable delivery of effective, innovative, readily available, treatments, therapeutics, medical
devices, and vaccines?
How do HHS policies and programs enhance promotion of healthy lifestyle behaviors to reduce
occurrence and disparities in preventable injury, illness, and death?
How effective are HHS programs and policies at mitigating the impacts of environmental factors,
including climate change, on health outcomes?
Public Health Evidence-Building Activities
HHS plays a significant role in both the American and global public health infrastructure and advances.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of public health and the widespread impact of
public health policies, programs, and decisions on individuals and entities, including governments,
schools, and private businesses. That said, HHS invests substantially in developing strong, timely, and
rigorous evidence supporting ongoing and changing public health conditions.
Several divisions across HHS are conducting evidence-building activities to address these questions,
including ASPR, ASPE, CDC, FDA, NIH, and SAMHSA. Most of the public health activities included in this
plan focus on programs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as vaccinations, the National Hospital
Preparedness Program, the Strategic National Stockpile, and the HHS emPOWER Program. However, the
area also includes other public health programs, such as the Garrett Lee Smith Youth Suicide Prevention
and Early Intervention Program, as well programs like Medicare and Medicaid. Eight identified evidence-
Page 5 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
building activities address public health priority questions. Full details on these activities are provided in
the appendix.
Many of the public health evidence-building activities target the entire American population. However,
some activities have a more narrow focus, such as youth or individuals with hypertension. Additionally,
some activities incorporate equity by assessing health disparities across sub-populations and focusing on
building evidence to reduce the observed differences, such as helping communities protect the health of
at-risk populations prior to, during, and after a disaster.
These activities address public health topics such as combating the opioid epidemic, vaccine hesitancy
and confidence, and suicide prevention. Specifically, evidence-building activities contained in this
document aim to assess long term effects of COVID-19 on vulnerable populations, analyze factors
related to vaccine hesitancy and confidence, evaluate the National Healthcare Preparedness Program,
and monitor programs focused on empowering at-risk populations, among others.
HHS utilizes a variety of methods and combinations of methods for the development of evidence
supporting public health policies and programs. Research and other methodologies include case studies,
descriptive and trend analysis, retrospective analysis, and literature reviews, performance
measurement, outcome evaluation, quasi-experimental evaluation, and policy analysis, among others.
Many of the public health activities in this plan use a combination of methods to address a priority
question. For example, a review of existing literature, statistical analysis, and predictive modeling to
understand COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy and confidence. These activities draw on internal resources,
such as data held by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid enrollment and claims, SAMHSA's
Performance and Accountability Reporting System, SAMHSA's Infrastructure Development, Prevention
and Mental Health Promotion (IPP) measures, as well as external data sources, including the U.S. Census
Household Pulse Survey, the American Community Survey, and private medical supply distribution data.
In addition to existing data, these evidence-building activities require development of new data through
via sources including the program data, such as the Annual Hospital Preparedness Program Cooperative
Agreement End-of-Year data, and qualitative interviews.
Strategic Goal 3: Strengthen Social Well-being, Equity, and Economic Resilience
HHS works to strengthen the economic and social well-being of Americans across the lifespan. HHS
provides effective and innovative pathways leading to equitable economic success for all individuals and
families. The Department strengthens early childhood development and expand opportunities to help
children and youth thrive equitably within their families and communities. HHS expands access to high-
quality services and resources for older adults and people with disabilities, and their caregivers to
support increased independence and quality of life. HHS also increases safeguards to empower families
and communities to prevent and respond to neglect, abuse, and violence, while supporting those who
have experienced trauma or violence.
Human Services Priority Questions
To what extent do HHS programs and policies provide effective and innovative pathways leading to
equitable economic success for all individuals and families?
Page 6 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
What are the impacts of HHS programs and policies on strengthening early childhood development
and expanding opportunities to help children and youth thrive equitably within their families and
communities?
What effective strategies or combinations of strategies expand access to high-quality services for
older adults and people with disabilities, and their caregivers, to support increased independence
and quality of life?
Human Services Evidence-Building Activities
Answering these priority questions uses numerous activities, resources, and divisions and several
divisions across HHS are conducting evidence-building activities to address these questions, including
ACF, ACL, CMS, and HRSA. These activities address programs like child welfare, the African American
Child and Family Research Center, the Medicaid innovation models, Healthy Start, and grant programs
like those from the HRSA Maternal and Child Health Bureau. Seven identified evidence-building activities
address human services priority questions. Full details on these activities are provided in the appendix.
Human services evidence-building activities focus on a variety of populations, including mothers,
children, and individuals with disabilities. Activities support HHS programs and policies related to
underserved communities, child welfare, services for individuals with disabilities, maternal health, and
health equity, among others. Notably, ACF, CMS, and HRSA will all be conducting evidence-building
activities for maternal and child health programs. Health equity is salient throughout the activities
contained in this plan and is especially salient among human services focused activities, such as the
African American Child and Family Research Center, which intends to identify promising approaches to
promote social and economic well-being among low-income African American populations.
HHS executes a broad range of evidence-building activities to answer these human services priority
questions. Activities include but are not limited to policy analysis, descriptive analysis, program
evaluation, foundational fact-finding, and performance measurement. Most of the activities in this plan
use a combination of methods to address a priority question, such as using a statistical analysis of claims
data and participant focus groups to evaluate the Integrated Care for Kids Model or web-based grantee
and stakeholder surveys and participant enrollment information to evaluate the Healthy Start program.
The activities utilize existing HHS data, including program enrollment data, administrative claims, grant
applications, survey data, and the Area Health Resource File (AHRF). They also incorporate external data
such as electronic health records, data provided by program participants, and vital records. Finally,
activities collect new data through surveys, interviews, focus groups, structured observation, site
assessments, and site visits.
Strategic Goal 4: Restore Trust and Accelerate Advancements in Science and Research for All
HHS is dedicated to restoring trust and accelerating advancements in science and research. The
Department is prioritizing science, evidence, and inclusion to improve the design, delivery, and
outcomes of HHS programs. It is investing in the research enterprise and the scientific workforce to
maintain leadership in the development of innovations that broaden our understanding of disease,
healthcare, public health, and human services resulting in more effective interventions, treatments, and
programs. Strengthening surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory capacity is another major focus to
better understand and equitably address diseases and conditions. HHS is also increasing evidence-based
Page 7 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
knowledge through improved data collection, use, and evaluation efforts to achieve better health
outcomes, reduced health disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience.
Activities in this priority area include, but are not limited to, support of scientific research, data,
evaluation, evidence, innovation, surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory capacity.
Research and Evidence Priority Questions
How does HHS improve the design, delivery, and outcomes of HHS programs by prioritizing science,
evidence, and inclusion?
Which HHS investments in the research enterprise are most effective for maintaining leadership in
the development of innovations that broaden our understanding of disease, healthcare, public
health, and human services resulting in more effective interventions, treatments, and programs?
Where does HHS need to further invest in the scientific workforce to maintain leadership in the
development of innovations that broaden our understanding of disease, healthcare, public health,
and human services resulting in more effective interventions, treatments, and programs?
What improvements would most strengthen surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory capacity to
understand and equitably address diseases and conditions?
What improvements are needed to HHS programs and policies for data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced
health disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Research and Evidence Evidence-Building Activities
HHS is dedicated to the mission of enhancing the health and well-being of all Americans, by providing for
effective health and human services and by fostering sound and sustained advances in the sciences
underlying medicine, public health, and social services. A large percentage of the Department's budget
is devoted to supporting research, and as such, many evidence-building activities are undertaken to
supplement and further understand research results. Divisions across HHS are conducting evidence-
building activities to address research and evidence questions, including HRSA, NIH, ONC, and SAMHSA.
These activities address programs across HHS, including child welfare, patient centered outcomes
research, vaccination, CDC's Public Health Law Program, the HHS emPOWER program, Quality
Improvement and Innovation Contracts, the Collaborative Health Equity Measurement Project in
Maternal and Child Health, the Cancer Moonshot, and the ONC Health IT Certification Program.
Fourteen identified evidence-building activities address research and evidence priority questions. Full
details on these activities are provided in the appendix.
As such, the research and evidence focused activities contained in this document address topics such as
the use and application of evidence, grant-making processes, health equity measurement, disease
reporting and epidemiological approaches, data sharing, evidence capacity needs, quality improvement
and innovation, and more. For the most part, research and evidence activities focus on grantees,
providers, and communities, rather than individual beneficiaries.
These division-level evaluations, research, and analysis efforts support cross-cutting issues, major
department-level goals, and time sensitive priority issues. In addition to division-level activities,
departmental analyses laid out in the Strategic Plan and this Evidence-Building Plan support and
coordinate efforts of divisions in achieving key priorities of HHS, especially related to research and
Page 8 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
evidence programs, policies, capacity-building, resource needs, and agency processes. Long term goals
are identified through HHS' Strategic Planning and Evidence-Building Plan processes.
HHS executes a broad range of evidence-building activities to answer these priority questions at the
division-and department-levels. Activities include but are not limited to policy analysis, legal
epidemiology, descriptive analysis, program evaluation, foundational fact-finding, impact analysis, and
performance measurement. Most of the activities in this plan use a combination of methods to address
a priority question. For example, using administrative data and semi-structured interviews to
understand how ACF can continue to develop and improve its evidence infrastructure and culture. NIH is
conducting a portfolio and outcomes analysis to assess the success of the Cancer Moonshot. The
activities utilize existing HHS data, including program administrative data, claims data, legal databases,
provider performance measures, grant applications, survey data, and area-level measures such as the
CDC's Social Vulnerability Index. They also incorporate external data such as electronic health records,
patent data, weather data, housing information, power outages, data provided by program participants,
and survey data. Finally, activities collect new data through surveys, interviews, focus groups, real world
testing data, and site visits.
Strategic Goal 5: Advance Strategic Management to Build Trust, Transparency, and Accountability
HHS is dedicated to advancing strategic management across the Department to build trust,
transparency, and accountability. A major focus of the Department is promoting effective enterprise
governance to ensure programmatic goals are met equitably and transparently across all management
practices. HHS sustains strong financial stewardship of resources to foster prudent use of resources,
accountability, and public trust. HHS works to uphold effective and innovative human capital resource
management resulting in an engaged, diverse workforce with the skills and competencies to accomplish
the HHS mission. The Department also ensures the security of HHS facilities, technology, data, and
information, while advancing environment-friendly practices.
Management Priority Questions
What improvements to HHS programs and policies can promote effective enterprise governance to
ensure programmatic goals are met equitably and transparently across all management practices?
Which HHS efforts are most effective for sustaining strong financial stewardship of HHS resources
to foster prudent use of resources, accountability, and public trust?
Which HHS investments are optimal to uphold effective and innovative human capital resource
management resulting in an engaged, diverse workforce with the skills and competencies to
accomplish the HHS mission?
What strategies can HHS implement to ensure the security of HHS facilities, technology, data and
information, while advancing environment-friendly practices?
Management Evidence-Building Activities
HHS prioritizes effective management of HHS resources, programs, and policies through coordinated
efforts across the Department as well as through division-level initiatives. Divisions across HHS are
conducting evidence-building activities to address these questions, including ASPR, CMS, and FDA,
across programs such as the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, quality
Page 9 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
improvement contracts, and food safety. Three identified evidence-building activities address
management priority questions. Full details on these activities are provided in the appendix.
As with other priority areas, addressing major management priorities and challenges requires division-
level and cross-department activities. Evidence-building activities within this document address effective
enterprise governance, equitable and transparent enterprise management, strong financial stewardship,
innovative human capital resource management, and security of HHS facilities, technology, and data and
information, among others. They target evidence-building within HHS' programs to improve the
Department's ability to achieve its mission.
Management evidence-building activities utilize methods and approaches such as systematic needs
assessments, administrative data analysis, performance measurement, portfolio analysis, statistical
analysis, literature reviews, coding and qualitative analysis, outcome and impact evaluation, direct
estimation, and small area analysis (SAE). Activities seek to understand the extent to which data is used
for policy and program development, identify problematic practices and structures, develop research
agendas, build and strengthen programmatic and operational evaluation capacity, translate evidence-
based findings into translational federal-to-community level innovative data, mapping, and artificial
intelligence tools, inform common measures for health equity, measure program progress, and inform
future policy making.
These activities utilize existing HHS data such as administrative data, Medicare fee-for-service claims
data, provider performance, and FDA inspections data. They also leverage external data such as data
from contractors. Finally, these activities include collection of new data as needed. For example, the
epidemiology on COVID-19 will continue to inform BARDA's portfolio, and CMS continuously uses
provider satisfaction surveys to inform policy and program decisions.
Data Sources
HHS has identified a range of data sources to support the evidence-building activities identified in this
plan, including data held by the Department, data held by other entities, and new research and data
collection, as discussed in the priority areas above. Although each activity relies on data sources specific
to the question and program being addressed, there are some data sources that are used frequently. In
particular, Medicare and Medicaid administrative and claims data are used for a number of program and
policy analyses. Specific programs use provider and enrollee information, including ACF program
administrative data and vital records provided by Maternal Opioid Misuse (MOM) Model awardees.
Many evidence-building activities rely on information submitted through grant applications or provided
by grantees, such as grant applications to the National Paralysis Resource Center. Program specific
information is often supplemented with area-level measures, such as those included in the Area Health
Resource File or CDC's Social Vulnerability Index. Other major sources of Federal data will also be
utilized, including the American Community Survey, the Census Pulse Survey, and national weather and
climate data.
Many of the activities identified will also collect qualitative data to supplement quantitative analyses.
These may be interviews, focus groups, or site visits. They may also field activity-specific surveys to
gather additional information from grantees or program participants.
Additional details on the data sources for all evidence-building activities are provided in the appendix in
sections titled "Existing Data Sources Held by the Division", "Existing Data from Other Sources", and
Page 10 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
"New Data Collection". The first of these sections describes existing data sources held by the division,
which are used for each analysis; the second describes existing data from other sources that are utilized;
the third describes any new data collection undertaken for each activity.
Methods
HHS uses a wide variety of methods and approaches to develop and use evidence to inform decision-
making. These include the four interdependent components of evidence according to Evidence Act:
policy analysis, program evaluation, performance measurement, and fact-finding, among others.
As mentioned previously, many, if not all, of these methods and approaches will be used to answer the
priority questions, and many activities will use a combination of multiple approaches. HHS agencies will
utilize both quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis strategies to inform the
development of policy analysis, research, and evidence-building in support of the five priority areas.
Specific methods include trend analysis of program data over time, including stratification to examine
disparities in trends; portfolio analysis; bibliometric analysis; stakeholder interviews; small area analysis;
differential equation simulation modeling; and logistic regression, among others. When required,
sampling schemes will be developed to draw representative samples from datasets or populations of
interest.
Additional details on the methods for all evidence- building activities are provided in the appendix in the
section titled "Study Design or Approach" For each activity, the information in this section describes the
study design or approach used for the analysis.
Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Challenges
Protecting the health and safety of Americans requires the coordination and engagement of divisions
across HHS and the federal government, utilizing the full range of health and human service activities. It
can be challenging to isolate the role of a specific program or policy, as well as to determine how
programs or policies interact to produce outcomes. Additionally, the American healthcare and human
services systems are complex and vast, involving federal, state, local, and tribal governments, private
payers, and hundreds of thousands of providers. This complexity requires a high level of engagement
and coordination in order to reduce the challenges caused by silos or service disruptions.
To conduct analyses, resources may be required to purchase key data sources and contractor support.
Given the expansive data resources and tools across HHS, it is challenging to identify all appropriate data
sources and tools for evaluative and assessment purposes. Data quality issues may be difficult to identify
given that some data sources may be completely new. In many cases, the primary use of the data and
the reason for its creation were not for evaluative purposes, making it challenging to know whether the
data is truly appropriate to address the question. Developing data use agreements to govern the
exchange of data for analyses can cause significant delays. Data management can be another challenge.
Depending on the topic, database development, maintenance, and dissemination require a complex
infrastructure including technical, logistical, and legal support and protections. Furthermore, data are
subject to a range of quality issues including completeness, accuracy, and timeliness, which can delay or
complicate analyses. Self-reported data, as intended to be use for some activities, are subject to
additional concerns arising from reporting bias and recall bias. Many projects will compile data from
different states, which may have different laws and regulations governing the collection of data,
Page 11 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
introducing challenges related to comparability. HHS requires highly expert, experienced, and
specialized staff both to oversee the collection and creation of databases and to use and analyze data to
develop information that is useful and accessible to decision makers. Additional challenges described in
the Appendix include time lags with regard to data availability, setting realistic expectations for project
timelines, and the availability of data on certain populations of interest.
As this plan is under development, the country is still in the midst of responding to the COVID-19
pandemic. The rapidly changing nature of the science, the economy, and the combined federal response
to the pandemic created a number of new challenges related to how HHS builds and uses evidence. For
example, interventions or policies that were successful when there were fewer risks of communicable
disease may no longer produce the same results. Data collection for surveys may have been interrupted
or halted altogether, disrupting trend lines. Healthcare visits dropped or switched to virtual
appointments. HHS staff were deployed or temporarily reassigned from their regular daily duties to
assist with the response.
Mitigation Strategies
Mitigating challenges will require a coordinated, transparent, collaborative process with relevant
stakeholders. Given the potential complications related to the scope of these priority areas, analyses
and recommendations will focus on data resources, tools, and needs that are likely to be of most benefit
widely across HHS. Additionally, because these priority areas are in line with the Strategic Plan, HHS
leadership will be actively engaged on a regular basis in understanding any progress, barriers, and
facilitators to the work.
Mitigation of challenges related to data resources may include offering multiple ways to submit data,
offering training and technical assistance to facilitate data collection, or relaxing deadlines for data
submission. Data quality can be improved with clear communication, training for those collecting data,
and review and validation processes. Some projects plan to initiate steps to acquire data and develop
methodology early in the study process to mitigate likely delays. The use of mixed methods approaches
are in themselves mitigation strategies - utilizing different sources and types of information with distinct
strengths and weaknesses in complementary ways. The inclusion of "research and evidence" as a
priority demonstrates the significant support and commitment from HHS leadership to address
challenges in data collection and use.
Mitigation and response to challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic include adoption of tools to
maintain continuity of operations while many HHS employees work remotely (i.e., virtual meeting
platforms), revisiting policies to best meet the evolving work environment, and developing contingency
plans for future emergency situations minimize disruption to HHS services and operations, including
evidence-building activities. Some analysis plans will be revised to accommodate delays in data
collection caused by the pandemic.
Additional information about anticipated challenges and mitigation strategies for each evidence-building
activity is included in the section titled "Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies".
Page 12 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Stakeholder Engagement
During the COVID-19 Pandemic to avoid placing additional burden on state and local governments, and
representatives of non-governmental research, HHS engaged a range of stakeholders with various
expertise across the Department, utilizing existing communication channels and bodies, such as the HHS
Evidence and Evaluation Council. This Council includes representatives from all HHS Operating and
several Staff Divisions. The Evidence and Evaluation Council, and specifically the Evaluation and
Evidence-Building Plans subcommittee, supported development of the plan, cross-department
coordination, and identification of stakeholders to be engaged. The Council has and will continue to be
an integral body for Evidence Act implementation, given that Council members provide division-level
insights and guidance for a cross-HHS implementation approach.
Specific HHS stakeholders are listed below:
HHS leadership
Operating and staff divisions
Evaluation Officer (EO), Laina Bush
Evidence & Evaluation Council members
Evidence-Building Plan and Evaluation Plan Subcommittee
HHS Division of Strategic Planning
The HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources
The HHS Strategic Planning community, especially the HHS Division of Strategic Planning in ASPE, has
been a key stakeholder and partner for the development of this plan. The HHS Evidence-Building Plan
and Strategic Plan are complimentary plans, which requires a high level of communication and
coordination for alignment of strategic planning and evidence-building activities. ASPE's Division of
Evidence, Evaluation and Data Policy will work closely with the Division of Strategic Planning to
coordinate stakeholder engagement efforts throughout the effective periods for both plans. These
activities will be described in annual Plan updates.
Beyond the Department, HHS coordinates with other Federal Evaluation Officers, agency Evidence Act
leadership, evaluation and evidence-building staff, the Office of Management & Budget, and others.
Federal agencies vary greatly in mission, scope, capacity, size, and organizational structure. For those
reasons, implementation approaches have differed greatly based on unique agency needs and context.
HHS is committed to engaging external stakeholders through a variety of methods and channels.
Stakeholder meetings such as those held by Federal Advisory Committees, including the National
Vaccine Advisory Committee and the Advisory Committee on Minority Health, provide opportunity for
public engagement. But, the primary approach to external stakeholder engagement is through HHS
Divisions and program offices which foster a wide range of two-way exchanges with diverse stakeholder
groups and the results of which were incorporated into their contributions to this plan. These exchanges
include Federal Register Notices, the use of Communities of Practice and panels of subject matter
experts, publishing Division-specific Evidence-Building Plans¹, and presentations regarding Evidence-
1 For example, the ACF plan and the ACL plan.
Page 13 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Building and evaluation activities². The information gathered through these activities is used to inform
their evidence building activities and is reflected in this document.
Commitment to Scientific Integrity
OMB's standards for program evaluations notes that Federal evaluations must produce findings that
Federal agencies and their stakeholders can confidently rely upon, while providing clear explanations of
limitations: they are to be conducted in accordance with principles of scientific integrity. In addition to
the program evaluation standards and practices issued by OMB and the subsequent HHS Evaluation
Policy, the release of recent memorandum and guidance are providing HHS with additional support and
direction for ensuring the scientific integrity of agency evaluations and evidence-building activities. The
Presidential Memorandum, Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and Evidence-
Based Policymaking, and OMB Memorandum, Evidence-Based Policymaking: Learning Agendas and
Annual Evaluation Plans, require that scientific integrity principles be incorporated into agency
evidence-building plans and annual evaluation plans. This memorandum, together with OMB guidance
and HHS policies, affirm that evaluations are scientific activities and as such, require the use of
appropriate methods which can include a broad range of approaches, independence from undue
influence, and processes that ensure integrity and quality. These recent requirements will contribute to
improved evaluation and evidence-building activities in HHS and will guide the development and
conduct of evaluations in accordance with the principles and foundations for scientific integrity.
Further demonstrating the Department's commitment to scientific integrity, Chief Data Officer,
Evaluation Officer, and Statistical Official of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS),
are developing a joint statement of commitment to scientific integrity in support of HHS's work and
fulfillment of the HHS mission to enhance the health and well-being of all Americans, by providing for
effective health and human services and by fostering sound, sustained advances in the sciences
underlying medicine, public health, and social services.
2 An example of a presentation is available at https://mathematica.org/publications/hhs-aspe-webinar-series
 developing-using-learning-agenda-approach-to-evidence-building-video-1
Page 14 of 44
APPENDIX: Evidence-Building Activities
Contributing Division: ACF
Activity Title: Research and Evaluation for Underserved Communities in Child Welfare
HHS Priority Questions: What are the impacts of HHS programs and policies on strengthening early
childhood development and expanding opportunities to help children and youth thrive equitably within
their families and communities? How can HHS optimize investments in the research enterprise to
maintain leadership in the development of innovations that broaden our understanding of disease,
health care, public health, and human services resulting in more effective interventions, treatments, and
programs?
Activity Description/Research Questions: This project will explore how child welfare agencies and their
community partners currently support underserved communities. The project also aims to gain insights
on the extent to which data are being used to determine service delivery gaps for underserved
communities, identify problematic practices and structures, and support child welfare agency staff and
partners to address these gaps. Further, the project will develop a research agenda and designs to
better understand and build the capacity for child welfare agencies and their partners to serve children
and families in these communities. It will address the following research questions: How do child welfare
agencies and their community partners currently support underserved communities? What research is
needed to better understand and build the capacity for child welfare agencies and their partners to
serve children and families in underserved communities?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): 2021 - 2026
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: TBD
Existing Data from Other Sources: TBD
New Data Collection: TBD
Study Design or Approach: TBD
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: TBD
Contributing Division: ACF
Activity Title: African American Child and Family Research Center
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies provide effective and innovative
pathways leading to equitable economic success for all individuals and families?
Activity Description/Research Questions: This research center will lead and support research on the
needs of African American populations served by ACF and promising approaches to promote social and
economic well-being among low-income African American populations. The center will provide
leadership on culturally competent research that can inform policies concerning low-income African
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
American populations and will foster significant scholarship regarding the needs and experiences of the
diverse African American population throughout the nation. The research questions are: What are the
needs of African American populations served by ACF? What are promising approaches to promote
social and economic well-being among low-income African American populations?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): TBD
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: TBD
Existing Data from Other Sources: TBD
New Data Collection: TBD
Study Design or Approach: The research center will bring together a diverse, inclusive, culturally
sensitive, and interdisciplinary team of academic and organizational partners to undertake research,
capacity building, and communication activities. The Center will develop research products, resources,
and a comprehensive communication plan that aims to build research capacity in the field and improve
understanding of African American populations in order to inform policy development and
programmatic responses.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Traditionally, research that has informed
predominate views of underrepresented groups, including African American populations, has not been
community engaged, culturally rigorous, or informed by consideration of structural inequities.
Moreover, such research has relied heavily on a comparative research framework in which the
behaviors, experiences, and outcomes of White Americans are used as the standard or reference point
against which the behaviors, experiences, and outcomes of underrepresented populations are assessed.
Often this research approach fails to acknowledge how aspects of research design and measurement
can bias findings and fails to acknowledge important historical and cultural contexts that differ across
groups. This research approach has contributed to the inherent assumption that the behaviors,
experiences, and outcomes of underrepresented groups that differ from White Americans represent
deficits and must be addressed to promote their economic and social well-being. We aim to support
research that is contextualized by a thorough understanding of historical and contemporary inequitable
social structures and systems as well as the diverse cultural practices of African American populations.
Contributing Division: ACF
Activity Title: ACF Evidence Capacity Support
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health
disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: This project will support ACF's efforts to build and strengthen
programmatic and operational evidence capacity by conducting foundational evidence activities with
ACF programs including systematic needs assessments and administrative data analysis. The research
Page 16 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
questions are: How can ACF continuously improve the effectiveness and efficiency of its programs? How
can ACF continue to develop and improve its evidence infrastructure and culture?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): 2020 - 2025
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: ACF program administrative data
Existing Data from Other Sources: TBD
New Data Collection: Semi-structured interviews, focus groups, and brief surveys of internal and/or
external stakeholders
Study Design or Approach: Project activities will include systematic needs assessments that will collect
and analyze information on program learning priorities; and administrative data analysis to assess the
suitability of ACF administrative data to address learning priorities.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Challenges may include setting realistic expectations
for project timelines; limited ACF SME time; and timely execution of data sharing agreements for access
to administrative data sources. To address these issues, the team has instituted a continuous quality
improvement approach, incorporating lessons learned into the design and execution of future
engagements.
Contributing Division: ACL
Activity Title: Process and Outcome Evaluation of the National Paralysis Resource Center (NPRC)
HHS Priority Questions: How do HHS programs and policies expand equitable access to comprehensive,
community-based, innovative, and culturally-competent health care services while recognizing social
determinants of health? What effective strategies or combinations of strategies expand access to high-
quality services for older adults and people with disabilities, and their caregivers, to support increased
independence and quality of life?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Research questions are:
How and to what extent does the National Paralysis Resource Center (NPRC):
1. improve the health and quality of life of individuals living with paralysis of all ages, their families,
and their support system?
2.
raise awareness of members of the target populations about paralysis?
3. increase access of members of the target populations to services relevant to individuals with
paralysis
4. increase the empowerment, confidence, and independence of individuals living with paralysis
5. strengthen support networks for individuals living with paralysis
6.
improve or increase opportunities for individuals living with paralysis for community living
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Federal Fiscal Years 2022-2027
Page 17 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Grant applications and reports (administrative data)
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: Interviews and surveys of a sample of key stakeholders and service recipients.
Study Design or Approach: Data for the process evaluation will be collected primarily through reviews
and administrative records and interviews with NPRC staff and partners (including grantees and
subcontractors). This secondary data collection will provide information about the inputs, activities and
outputs of the NPRC to provide information about the quality, structure, and efficiency of NPRC services.
Data for the outcome evaluation will be collected through surveying and interviewing a sample of those
served by the NPRC. This primary data collection will provide information about the impact of the NPRC
services on individuals living with paralysis of all ages, their families, and their support system.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: None
Contributing Division: AHRQ
Activity Title: TAKEheart Initiative
HHS Priority Questions: How does HHS improve the design, delivery, and outcomes of HHS programs by
prioritizing science, evidence, and inclusion?
Activity Description/Research Questions: An important goal of AHRQ is to facilitate implementation of
findings from patient centered outcomes research (PCOR) into health care practice. Accordingly, to help
improve cardiac rehabilitation rates, the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Rehabilitation/Millior Hearts Cardiac Rehabilitation Collaborative has developed a Cardiac
Rehabilitation Change Package (CRCP) and established a national goal of 70% participation in CR (up
from 20-30%) by 2022 for eligible patients. AHRQ's TAKEheart initiative is designed to broadly
disseminate and implement the strategies described in the CRCP to hospitals nationwide to help achieve
this goal. The research question is: How can AHRQ help disseminate evidence-based practices and foster
their implementation within care delivery settings?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): March 2019-March 2023
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: N/A
Existing Data from Other Sources: TAKEheart project leaders are collecting data from Partner Hospitals
and Learning Community hospitals.
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: A public TAKEheart Website has been created to (a) increase awareness of
the challenges of increasing patient participation in CR nationwide and (b) provide educational
resources and training materials (e.g., web-based training modules and implementation guides) for
hospitals wishing to adopt evidence-based strategies for meeting these challenges. In addition, a group
Page 18 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
of TAKEheart Partner Hospitals (PHs) recruited from across the US is currently participating in monthly
web-based training sessions and receiving individual coaching in developing and implementing
individualized hospital action plans for putting these evidence-based strategies into practice. These PHs
exchange insights with their peers through monthly meetings of Peer Action Groups. Finally, a larger
group of hospitals will be invited to join Learning Community Affinity Groups to share knowledge about
ways to address challenges to and disparities in patient participation in CR. Since the Learning
Community was launched in March 2020, the first set of Affinity Groups focused on strategies for
adapting CR to the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., providing in-person CR under restricted conditions and in
using remote phone and other remote technologies to provide CR training at home).
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The monthly trainings of the first of two cohorts of
Partner Hospitals were halted in March 2020 due to the pandemic and were resumed in May 2021.
Some of the hospitals enrolled in the first cohort had to drop out and were replaced with hospitals that
had applied to be in a second cohort. Additional recruitment is now underway for this second cohort
(that will begin training in Fall 2021), but it is unlikely that the target of an additional 50 hospitals for the
second cohort will be met.
Contributing Division: ASPE
Activity Title: Long term effects of COVID on vulnerable patients
HHS Priority Questions: How effective are HHS programs and policies at protecting individuals, families,
and communities against communicable, and infectious disease through effective, innovative, readily
available and equitable delivery of treatments, therapeutics, medical devices, and vaccines?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Two studies will examine downstream effects of COVID on
vulnerable populations. The first will examine the long term health effects of a COVID diagnosis, the
second the long term health effects of medical care services foregone due to the pandemic. The
research question is: How can we prepare to meet the long term needs of patients affected directly or
indirectly by COVID 19?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing through FY 2023
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Core components database used for HSP contracted
research completed in FY 21 (this aggregates findings from evaluations of youth programs)
Existing Data from Other Sources: TBD; data from previous evaluations could be used to take a meta-
analytic approach to determining core components of a particular type of program focused on specific
outcomes
New Data Collection: TBD; new data could be generated by requiring certain federally funded
evaluations to use a core components approach
Study Design or Approach: Study 1 is a cohort analysis comparing outcomes for patient diagnosed with
COVID to a matched set of patients without a COVID diagnosis. Study 2 will compare potential
Page 19 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
downstream health consequences of key services not provided during March through May of
2020.Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The core studies will use Medicare data. We
are examining the challenges that will arise due to the issues of completeness, privacy, and continuity of
data that arise with TMSIS and private data sources.
Contributing Division: ASPE
Activity Title: Increasing Use of Core Components in HHS Evidence Building and Application
HHS Priority Questions: How does HHS improve the design, delivery, and outcomes of HHS programs by
prioritizing science, evidence, and inclusion?
Activity Description/Research Questions: HHS will work with a leading expert in the field to establish a
federal working group on using component-based research for evidence-based policymaking, to
establish common interagency understandings about the potential of evidence generated with core
components research, and provide tools and support for using this evidence. This working group will
help federal staff put this approach into action for ongoing program improvement and increased,
equitable policy and program impact. The research question is: How can the federal government apply
a core components approach to improve outcomes by increasing uptake of evidence-based practices?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): August 2021 - August 2024
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: N/A
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: To move the evidence base beyond identification of "model programs,"
which do not often achieve widespread uptake in the field because they are expensive, difficult to
adapt, or don't meet the community's needs. ASPE and other research finds that the core components
of effective programs can be identified and disseminated to program administrators. This builds on
previous work that used meta-analyses to identify core components (program, participant, and
implementation features) that were empirically related to specific positive outcomes across youth
programs represented in the database used. The working group, to be established in FY 22, will gather
additional examples of core components approaches from across the government and develop tools to
expand the use of such approaches.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: HHS agencies and other federal agencies are not at
the same point of pursuing core components approaches and may need time and support to work
toward a common language and understanding.
Page 20 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Contributing Division: ASPE
Activity Title: COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy and Confidence
HHS Priority Questions: How does HHS improve the design, delivery, and outcomes of HHS programs by
prioritizing science, evidence, and inclusion? How does HHS improve the design, delivery, and outcomes
of HHS programs by prioritizing science, evidence, and inclusion?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Evidence-building activity: This policy analysis utilizes data on
COVID-19 vaccination and intent to vaccinate. The analysis examines demographic and geographic
factors associated with vaccine hesitancy, including reasons for not vaccinating. The analysis also
develops predictions of vaccine hesitancy, and vaccination at state, county and sub-state levels. The
research questions are: How can HHS improve the comprehensiveness and applicability of vaccine
confidence and related data available for stakeholders and policymakers? How can HHS programs be
utilized to build confidence in COVID-19 vaccines?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): 02/2021-ongoing
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: N/A
Existing Data from Other Sources: U.S. Census Household Pulse Survey; American Community Survey;
CDC Vaccine Administration Tracker; CDC Social Vulnerability Index; Surgo COVID-19 Vaccine Coverage
Index
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: The statistical analysis utilizes a logistic regression to analyze predictors of
the outcome of interest (e.g., vaccination, vaccine hesitancy) that include sociodemographic and
geographic information. The estimates are then used to make predictions for other geographic areas.
Our approach also discusses the relevant literature or other information to complement the findings
from the statistical approach.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Data for certain groups or areas may not be available
and may need to be supplemented with information from the literature or case studies.
Contributing Division: ASPR
Activity Title: National Healthcare Preparedness Program (NHPP) Evaluation
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS improve capabilities to predict, prepare for, and respond to public
health emergencies and threats in the nation and across the globe?
Activity Description/Research Questions: NHPP Evaluation activities use performance measure data
across programs (including the Hospital Preparedness Program Cooperative Agreement, the Hospital
Association Cooperative Agreement, and funding to the Regional National Special Pathogen System) to
assess progress toward program goals, successes, challenges, and gaps in health care preparedness. The
Page 21 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
research question is: How have NHPP's cooperative agreement activities improved and addressed gaps
in health care preparedness?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing annually
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: HPP Cooperative Agreement End-of-Year data; Hospital
Association Cooperative Agreement End-of-Year data
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: Annual Hospital Preparedness Program Cooperative Agreement End-of-Year data;
Annual Hospital Association Cooperative Agreement End-of-Year data; COVID-19 Supplemental Funding
Data
Study Design or Approach: Annual Hospital Preparedness Program Cooperative Agreement End-of-Year
data; Annual Hospital Association Cooperative Agreement End-of-Year data; COVID-19 Supplemental
Funding Data.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: A challenge is the self-reported nature of the data.
Clear communications, training for recipients, and validation processes are conducted to mitigate this
challenge and to seek to enhance the quality and completeness of the data.
Contributing Division: ASPR
Activity Title: Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) Portfolio Review
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS sustain strong financial stewardship of HHS resources to foster
prudent use of resources, accountability, and public trust?
Activity Description/Research Questions: BARDA will continue to evaluate alignment of medical
countermeasure investments to the forthcoming BARDA Strategic Plan, MCM requirements and policies,
and relevant authorizing legislation. As these investments generate data and new advancements are
made in life sciences, the opportunity to calibrate these investments will be undertaken. The research
question is: How can BARDA optimize investments in medical countermeasure (MCM) development and
procurement to protect Americans from national health security threats?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing annually
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Data showing how well the existing portfolio aligns with
identified threats, forthcoming BARDA Strategic Plan, and MCM requirements and policies will be
regularly evaluated.
Existing Data from Other Sources: Data from contract performers is regularly conveyed to the BARDA as
part of the reporting process spelled out in the agreements. The outside data will include preclinical
toxicology and efficacy and clinical safety & efficacy. Other programs that are not specific to a single
Page 22 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
MCM, will utilize data relevant to the performance or advancement of a technology, capability or
platform.
New Data Collection: Data from contract performers is regularly conveyed to the BARDA as part of the
reporting process spelled out in the agreements. The outside data will include preclinical toxicology and
efficacy and clinical safety & efficacy. Other programs that are not specific to a single MCM, will utilize
data relevant to the performance or advancement of a technology, capability or platform.
Study Design or Approach: The design of the portfolio analysis is to:
1. Evaluate alignment of current BARDA portfolio to identified threats, forthcoming BARDA
Strategic Plan, and MCM requirements and policies
2. Account for the ongoing costs for the advancement and procurement of MCMs in the
portfolio
3. Analyze the current and prospective future investments to enhance the preparedness posture
4. Inform budget formulation process
The Portfolio Review process will initiate in January 2022 and continue an annual basis thereafter. The
Portfolio Review will build on focused Program Reviews BARDA conducted in 2021.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Uncertainty: An enormous amount of emerging data
regarding the performance of MCMs for COVID-19 in real-time will guide how BARDA should invest. A
clear understanding of the multiyear COVID-19 funding will a prerequisite to any/all choices made about
ongoing development or procurement of vaccines, therapeutics, and diagnostics. Wherever transitions
for financial obligations to other agencies or institutions can be articulated, the scope of data BARDA
should collect or maintain will be simplified. Operational: Collecting the detailed data to support
Portfolio Analysis will require systematic and centralized capture of MCM level information from within
each BARDA Contract. The data structure and systems to manage this are nearing completion within
BARDA.
Contributing Division: ASPR
Activity Title: Supply Chain Control Tower (SCTT)
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS improve capabilities to predict, prepare for, and respond to public
health emergencies and threats in the nation and across the globe?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Identify medical supplies of interest in support of various
types of incident responses to add to the SCCT that would be of use for ASPR and Strategic National
Stockpile situational awareness. As part of the distributor sustainment plan and updated data user
agreements, identify and prioritize new data feeds for enhanced medical supply visibility. The research
question is: How have the types of supply chain data feeds into the SCCT been expanded and enhanced
in support of ASPR's all-hazards response beyond COVID?
Page 23 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: PPE, pharmaceutical, testing, and select needles and syringe
data feeds that identify product distribution from private distributors, manufacturers, USG stockpiles,
and State stockpile inventory
Existing Data from Other Sources: Private medical supply distributors, state stockpiles, and non-HHS
federal supplies (such as FEMA)
New Data Collection: With new product identification, request current SCCT participants to expand
their data feeds to include the new products as it relates to SNS needs in addition, identifying new
partners to participate in SCCT to enhance the end to end visibility for these new product additions
Study Design or Approach: A complete review of relevant medical supply products will need to be
performed and mapped to types of responses that have medical impacts that ASPR responds to. That
mapping will demonstrate which supplies are used for multiple types of incidents and would be
considered as a higher priority supply to include in the SCCT data feeds.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Encouraging new participants to contribute data,
justification for importance of data needs, establishing DUAs for new participants, and updating current
DUAs. All these things take time and legal review.
Contributing Division: ASPR
Activity Title: emPOWER At-risk Population and Healthcare System Resilience Monitoring and
Evaluation
HHS Priority Questions: How effective are HHS programs and policies at protecting individuals, families,
and communities against communicable, and infectious disease through effective, innovative, readily
available and equitable delivery of treatments, therapeutics, medical devices, and vaccines? How can
HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and evaluation to increase evidence-based
knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health disparities, and improved social well-
being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The HHS emPOWER Program and healthcare system
monitoring project seeks to identify gaps and translate evidence based findings into translational
federal-to-community level innovative data, mapping, and artificial intelligence tools, as well as training
and resources, to help communities nationwide protect the health of at-risk populations prior to, during,
and after a disaster. For example, prior studies identified gaps in assistance for electricity and healthcare
service dependent at-risk populations living independently in communities. These findings were
translated into mitigation tools via the HHS emPOWER Program that is currently helping communities
prepare for over 4.2 million individuals who live independently and rely on electricity-dependent
durable medical and assistive equipment and devices, and or essential health care services. Research
questions are: How can HHS programs, policies, and data identify gaps and inform federal to community
Page 24 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
based mitigation tools to protect at-risk populations prior to, during and after a public health emergency
or disaster? How can HHS programs, policies, and data provide critical information to reduce disparities
and advance community readiness to address at-risk needs prior to, during, and after a disaster? How
can HHS programs, policies, and data help communities identify opportunities to strengthen healthcare
system readiness and delivery from inpatient to home and community-based models of care and reduce
adverse outcomes in at-risk populations? How can HHS programs, policies, and data help communities
understand gaps in access to healthcare coverage and services to advance health equity?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing annually
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: ASPR, in partnership with the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services Center for Medicare, evaluate Medicare and Medicaid administrative claims data
Existing Data from Other Sources: Federal hazard and other available data sources as needed (e.g.,
weather and other climate, housing, power outage, etc.).
New Data Collection: Monthly updated Medicare, and as available Medicaid, administrative claims data
obtain from CMS standard operations
Study Design or Approach: N/A
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The studies will not represent 100% of the at-risk
population as studies will use Medicare and Medicaid claims data. However, studies and their peer-
reviewed publications have identified critical findings for addressing needs and may be similarly applied
across at-risk populations even though they may not be fully represented by Medicare and Medicaid
data. Additionally, publishing methods for these studies allows researchers who may have access to
other data sources the ability to expand analyses and findings as well.
Contributing Division: CDC
Activity Title: Rigorous Evaluations of Telehealth Strategies to Address Hypertension Management and
Control
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies reduce costs and improve quality
of health care services? How do HHS policies and programs promote healthy lifestyle choices to reduce
occurrence and disparities in preventable injury, illness, and death?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Telehealth is one avenue that may increase access to
healthcare for underserved populations, and this project will focus on identifying implications and
recommendations for the use of telehealth among populations who experience disproportionate risk of
hypertension and barriers to healthcare access. The project will use a stepwise approach, using an
understanding of the context and policies related to telehealth, to develop an evaluation plan which will
evaluate the implementation of telehealth at three health systems. The evaluations will assess
telehealth implementation, cardiovascular disease outcomes over time, compare differences in
outcomes among patients receiving telehealth services versus those receiving in-person medical care,
Page 25 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
cost-effectiveness, and the sustainability of telehealth strategies including the policy context for long
term implementation of telehealth.
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): September 2021 - November 2023
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: N/A
Existing Data from Other Sources:
Secondary data analysis using data extracted from health
system site data systems (i.e., EHRs)
Secondary data analysis of Federal and state telehealth
statutes, legislation, and regulations Secondary data analysis of published and grey literature
for the use of telehealth to address cardiovascular disease and address health disparities
New Data Collection: Qualitative Interviews
Study Design or Approach: Overall, evaluation methods will include a retrospective analysis of adult
patients with hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or other cardiovascular disease who received
telehealth services at three separate health systems over the past year or more. The evaluation design
will use quasi-experimental methods that includes a comparison group to assess the contribution of
telehealth implementation to relevant outcomes including hypertension. A policy analysis will include a
systematic assessment of Federal and state policies, statutes, and regulations that facilitate and limit
telehealth.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: This effort aims to build practice-based evidence
within a national context of rapidly changing of healthcare delivery, largely driven by the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. These challenges also present unique opportunities for evidence-building. The
evaluation design seeks to demonstrate effectiveness of telehealth strategies to address cardiovascular
disease and health disparities, while proactively considering how current policies and regulations affect
telehealth implementation and reimbursement of services, and the role of the COVID-19 pandemic in
catalyzing broad health system implementation of telehealth.
Contributing Division: CDC
Activity Title: Disease Reporting Legal Epidemiological Studies
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS further strengthen surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory
capacity to understand and equitably address diseases and conditions? How can HHS programs and
policies improve data collection, use, and evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads
to better health outcomes, reduced health disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and
economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: PHLP attorneys analyze state laws that require healthcare
providers, laboratories, and other entities to report findings of certain diseases and conditions to state
or local public health authorities. Attorneys use legal epidemiology to build datasets that allow
researchers to view trends and variations across jurisdictions related to identified factors such as
Page 26 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
diseases and conditions required to be reported, the manner in which reporting must take place, and
the information required to be reported. Compilation of these data can be used to (1) help health care
providers and laboratories achieve compliance with reporting laws; (2) study the reporting of
demographic information, and (3) inform public health professionals about the scope of disease
reporting requirements by jurisdiction. The research question is: How do state disease reporting laws
factor into state, tribal, local, and territorial public health authorities with disease surveillance and
presentation?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): August 2020 - September 2023
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: CSTLTS/OPHLS currently holds preliminary datasets on state
disease reporting laws in the Public Health Law Information Portal.
Existing Data from Other Sources: The datasets on state disease reporting laws held by the
CSTLTS/OPHLS were constructed based on searches and data extraction from the following secondary
data sources: Westlaw (for statutes and regulations) and health department websites (for disease lists
and procedures).
New Data Collection: This activity involves ongoing search and data extraction from the aforementioned
secondary data sources. New data will be collected as the dataset is updated following legislative
sessions each year. Additional data elements may be added as need requires.
Study Design or Approach: Attorneys use legal epidemiology to build datasets that will allow
researchers to view trends and variations across jurisdictions related to identified factors such as
diseases and conditions required to be reported, the manner in which reporting must take place, and
the information required to be reported. These legal epidemiology methods include the collection of
legal text (state statutes, regulations, and policies), coding and qualitative analysis of legal text for the
presence or absence of previously identified legal attributes. This portfolio is expected to grow and
evolve over time.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: There are several challenges with this project: (1)
states use various legal and policy mechanisms to promulgate these requirements - statutes,
regulations, health department websites - so ensuring a complete collection is challenging; (2) there are
a tremendous number of laws in this domain - across at least fifty-one jurisdictions and covering over
485 reportable diseases and conditions; (3) designing a coding scheme that applies consistently across
the wide array of mechanisms and jurisdictions; (4) designing a coding scheme that works applies across
the hundreds of diseases and conditions covered by these laws. To address these challenges,
researchers will make improvements to the coding scheme(s) through the systematic application of
coding questions to sample states, strategically selected to represent the diversity of laws and
jurisdictions. PHLP will also continue to engage with subject matter experts at CDC and STLT health
departments and in healthcare settings.
Page 27 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Contributing Division: CMS
Activity Title: Maternal Opioid Misuse (MOM) Model Evaluation
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies strengthen and expand access to
mental health and substance use disorder treatment and recovery services for individuals and families?
What are the impacts of HHS programs and policies on strengthening early childhood development and
expanding opportunities to help children and youth thrive equitably within their families and
communities?
Activity Description/Research Questions: MOM is a program for pregnant/postpartum Medicaid and
CHIP participants with opioid use disorder (OUD). The MOM Model evaluation seeks to determine if
evidenced-based, integrated care that includes access to medication assisted treatment (MAT) can
improve outcomes and reduce costs for pregnant and postpartum women with opioid disorder and their
infants. The evaluation seeks to build the evidence base for what works best for treating pregnant
women with OUD, especially in light of multiple co-morbidity often present (particularly other substance
abuse and behavioral health disorders). The evaluation also seeks to assess the effects of integrated
care (including data sharing) among provider and social service entities. The research questions are: To
what extent does implementing a coordinated care model for pregnant and postpartum women with
OUD improve quality and reduce the costs associated with treating pregnant and postpartum women
and infants affected by OUD? What are specific best practices for serving this population?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): January 2020 - January 2027
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Medicaid T-MSIS data for MOM Model awardees and
potential comparison States (yet to be determined), including demographic and eligibility data, inpatient
data, other services data, pharmacy data, and other T-MSIS data files
Existing Data from Other Sources: Vital records data provided by MOM Model awardees; Mother-infant
dyad identifiers provided by MOM Model awardees; Ongoing literature reviews and environmental
scans, including any new documents provided by MOM Model awardees; MOM Model awardee-
reported, participant-level data on demographic characteristics, mental and physical health
characteristics, substance abuse, social determinants of health data, service use type and frequency, and
outcomes.
New Data Collection: Primary data collection in the form of key informant interviews, focus groups/in-
depth interviews with MOM Model participants, Photovoice with MOM Model participants, and
structured observations of care delivery sites.
Study Design or Approach: The evaluation will produce annual reports of model outcomes beginning
with an evaluation of the model pre-implementation period (through June 20, 2021). The evaluation
uses a theoretically guided, integrated mixed methods design. As such, each aspect of the evaluation
continuously informs the others. Participant level data includes program-based quality measures and
information on participants provided by care delivery partners. The qualitative analysis includes in-
person and virtual site visits that involve environmental scans, interviews, focus groups, and innovative
participant-directed methods. The quantitative analysis of claims and vital records (birth and death) will
Page 28 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
include impacts analyses with comparison groups as possible. Where an impacts analysis is not possible,
the evaluation will consider pre-post analysis and forms of descriptive statistical analysis.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: An impact analysis may not be possible for all
awardees (barriers include small sample sizes, difficulties in establishing appropriate comparison groups,
and quality of claims data for this population).
Contributing Division: CMS
Activity Title: Integrated Care for Kids (InCK) Model Evaluation
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies reduce costs and improve quality
of health care services? What are the impacts of HHS programs and policies on strengthening early
childhood development and expanding opportunities to help children and youth thrive equitably within
their families and communities?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The evaluation seeks to determine whether implementation
of InCK improves health outcomes and reduces Medicaid costs among beneficiaries in the targeted
population. The evaluation employs a mixed methods approach that includes measures for key service
areas (clinical and behavioral health, food and housing security), rigorous qualitative case studies, and
an impacts analysis of Medicaid claims data using within-state comparison groups. The primary
questions for the pre-implementation period are:
What are the characteristics of the InCK population? What are barriers and facilitators to initiating InCK
programs, including APM design? How do these barriers and facilitators differ by awardee and by local
and state-specific contexts?
The primary evaluation questions for the implementation period are: Does the InCK intervention
(including the APM) result in reduced total health care expenditures and improved quality of care, and
specifically:
a reduction in Medicaid and CHIP covered inpatient utilization and Emergency Department (ED)
use?
reductions in cost of care to Medicaid and CHIP?
reductions in out of home placement (e.g., foster care, prolonged hospitalization)?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): August 2020 - August 2029.
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Unredacted, Final and Preliminary T-MSIS Analytic Research
Identifiable Files (TAF RIF) for the years covering 2017-2027; CMS TAF Vital Status Files for the years
covering 2017-2027; Model documentation submitted by awardee recipients (ARs) including progress
reports, operational plans, standard operating procedures, and applications/NCCs; Clinical and non-
clinical performance measure data (to be captured by the Implementation and Monitoring contractor)
Page 29 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Existing Data from Other Sources: Area Health Resource File (https://data.hrsa.gov/topics/health-
workforce/ahrf); HPSAs (https://bhw.hrsa.gov/shortage-designation/hpsas); US Census/American
Community Survey (https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data.html); Rural-Urbar
Commuting Areas (https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-commuting-area-code Area
Deprivation Index https://www.neighborhoodatlas.medicine.wisc.edu/);COVID-19 data from
USAFacts.org(https://usafacts.org/visualizations/coronavirus-covid-19-spread-map/);County Health
Rankings (https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/); Social Determinants of Health
(https://www.ahrq.gov/sdoh/index.html);Child welfare and foster care data: Data from states'
Statewide Automated Child Welfare Information System (SACWIS) or Child Welfare Information Systems
(CCWIS) or alternative administrative data system (specifically, data elements that support states'
submissions to the Federal Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) and the
National Child Abuse and Neglect Data System (NCANDS)); Juvenile justice data: Data from states'
juvenile justice agencies, courts, or other sources containing data related to "systems that respond to
youth that come into contact with law enforcement and are accused of breaking the law"; Education
data: Data from states' education agencies and/or local school districts; Food security data: Data from 1)
states' health departments, 2) human services / social services agencies, or 3) education agencies
related to eligibility/utilization of food assistance or food-related needs; Cash assistance data: Data from
states' health departments or human services / social services agencies related to eligibility/utilization of
cash assistance programs; Housing data: Data from federal, state, or local agencies on
eligibility/utilization of housing assistance
New Data Collection: Retrospective Attribution Files (collected by ARs); Retrospective Comparison Files
(collected by ARs); Service Integration Level (SIL) Checklists (collected by ARs); Aggregate Performance
Measures and underlying individual-level admin or EHR data (collected by ARs); Interviews with ARs ;
Interviews with State Medicaid Agencies; Interviews with members of the Partnership Council;
Interviews/focus groups with providers serving the attributed population and providers serving the
comparison group population.; Interviews/focus groups/other TBD data collection with patients and
families/caregivers potentially involved with and/or impacted by the InCK model
Study Design or Approach: The evaluation will produce annual reports of model outcomes beginning
with an evaluation of model pre-implementation. Milestones are still being negotiated with awardees.
The design plan for the implementation design is due in the fall of 2021. The evaluation uses an
integrated mixed methods approach. As such, each aspect of the evaluation continuously informs the
others. Quality measures and demographic information on participants are provided by awardees. The
qualitative analysis includes in-person and virtual site visits that involve environmental scans, interviews,
focus groups, and innovative participant-directed methods. The quantitative analysis of Medicaid (and
CHIP where applicable) claims will include impacts analyses with comparison groups from non-
overlapping areas in the same states where beneficiaries are served.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Implementation has not yet begun for this model,
and quality of the anticipated data is unclear.
Page 30 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Contributing Division: CMS
Activity Title: Network of Quality Improvement and Innovation Contractors (NQIIC) Independent
Evaluation
HHS Priority Questions: How does HHS improve the design, delivery, and outcomes of HHS programs by
prioritizing science, evidence, and inclusion? How can HHS programs and policies improve the
promotion of effective enterprise governance to ensure programmatic goals are met equitably and
transparently across all management practices?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The QIOs and other quality improvement contractors are
required to provide evidence-based, data-driven technical assistance to health care facilities to improve
quality and meet pre-defined outcomes related to: Opioid use and misuse; Patient safety; Chronic
disease management; Care coordination; Responding to public health emergencies and COVID-19 and
infection control; Immunization; and Training. CMS's evaluation strategy aims to understand: which
aspects of QIO interventions are effective; variance in performance across QIOs and interventions;
providers' satisfaction with the quality improvement interventions.
This information will inform current work and future Quality Improvement Program planning to shape
program based on potential for maximum effectiveness and impact, in addition to eliminating low-value,
low-impact activities. The NQIIC Independent Evaluation Contractor executes a formative evaluation
that plans to address the following priority questions: Which contractors are meeting which program
targets? What strategies are they using to meet them? What barriers are keeping contractors from
meeting targets and how can these be overcome? Annual provider satisfaction surveys will measure:
What proportion of targeted providers use QIO contractor resources to improve health care quality?
How satisfied are the providers with these resources? What can the QIOs do to improve satisfaction?
The impact evaluation will measure: To what extent did the QIO program meet the targets for each
quality improvement category? To what extent can we attribute the changes in outcomes associated
with the categories to the quality improvement networks and/or other activities supported through the
QIO? What are the likely projected and actual ROI for QIO program outcomes (both quantitatively and
qualitatively)? How does ROI and impact vary by contractor? For COVID-19 response, what synergies
were achieved between the QIOs and other major HHS programs, especially AHRQ's Project Echo?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): September 25, 2020-September 24, 2025.
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Major quantitative data sources include: Medicare fee-for-
service claims; Provider/Physician Performance (Hospital Compare, Nursing Home Compare, Physician
Compare); Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS); Deliverable Administration Review Repository
Tool (DARRT) data
Existing Data from Other Sources: Quality and Safety Review System (QSRS) inpatient safety data: a
multi-stage sample of medical charts from Medicare beneficiaries from a small sample of hospitals. (See:
AHRQ National Scorecard on Hospital-Acquired Conditions); National Healthcare Safety Network
(NHSN); Tiberius data (HHS); Nursing Home Minimum Data set;
New Data Collection: QIN-QIO real-time collected data (Qualtrics); OMB cleared survey of providers'
satisfaction with NQIIC services (not yet executed)
Page 31 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Study Design or Approach: This is a 5-year mixed methods evaluation using both qualitative and
quantitative methods. An Independent Evaluation Contractor, Booz Allen Hamilton, with highly
credentialed statisticians and health services researchers conducts the work under the direction of CMS.
Although the evaluation is independent, the specific research questions are defined and the work is
monitored by Ph.D.-trained researchers and clinicians at CMS who use their program knowledge to
assure the contractors investigate the right populations, interventions, and outcomes.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: No challenges identified at this time.
Contributing Division: CMS
Activity Title: Section 2001 of the SUPPORT Act: Impact of Telehealth Amendments on Healthcare
Utilization and Outcomes related to SUD
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies strengthen and expand access to
mental health and substance use disorder treatment and recovery services for individuals and families?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act provisions
allow expanded telehealth reimbursement for individuals receiving treatment for SUD and co-occurring
MH disorders; therefore, changes in telehealth use for these services is of interest. For our analysis, we
will select individuals with a SUD diagnosis, and measure any telehealth use for SUD or MH treatment
among this population. We will ask whether the use of telehealth for these services increased after
enactment of the SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act, compared to the year prior to enactment,
by examining metrics associated with the following areas: SUD/MH treatment utilization; Emergency
Department Visits Related to SUD; Follow-up After ED Visit; Overdoses; 2.1.2.5 Hospital Utilization
Related to SUD; Treatment Lag; and Costs.Questions to Be Addressed in the Quantitative Analysis: 1)
What is the impact of SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act implementation on telehealth use for
treatment of OUD and SUD and co-occurring MH disorders? 2) What is the impact of SUPPORT for
Patients and Communities Act implementation on the following healthcare utilization outcomes?
Emergency department (ED) visits related to SUD; Follow-up after an ED visit related to SUD;
Hospitalization related to SUD; Treatment lag (i.e., time between diagnosis and treatment); Costs
related to SUD and MH treatment reimbursement. 3) What is the impact of implementation of SUPPORT
for Patients and Communities Act on the following health outcomes? Rate of overdoses, Rate of
overdose deaths Questions to Be Addressed in the Qualitative Analysis: 1) What, if any, are the key
facilitators to implementation that have resulted in positive outcomes (clinical or non-clinical)? 2) What,
if any, are the key barriers/challenges preventing effective and efficient implementation? 3) What, if
any, are the unintended consequences associated with implementation?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing - 2023
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Medicare FFS Part A, Part B and Part D claims
Existing Data from Other Sources: Explore the use of social and geographic covariates, such as the Area
Deprivation Index (ADI), other census block variables, or variables from the Health Resources and
Services Administration (HRSA) Area Health Resources Files (AHRF). This evaluation will also look at
Page 32 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
National Death Index (NDI) data, which is included in the Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse (CCW) for
the years through 2016. The NDI is a compendium of death record information on file in state vital
statistics offices and is maintained by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) and the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
New Data Collection: Qualitative data collection will be conducted.
Study Design or Approach: The Health Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) will
first conduct descriptive analyses examining crude differences and rates of telehealth use and other,
related outcomes across the three time periods (baseline; SUPPORT act implementation; COVID
waivers), as well as by key demographic characteristics including (but not necessarily limited to) age,
sex, race/ethnicity, disability status, comorbidities, urban or rural residence, urban or rural provider
location, facility type, and other geographic and socioeconomic indicators. Telehealth use and outcomes
may also be examined stratified by substance(s) used and by MH condition. We will also conduct
descriptive analyses of OUD and SUD prevalence, deaths, overdoses, and related healthcare utilization,
such as ED visits. Based on results from the descriptive analyses, we will construct analytic models that
seek to determine changes in trends of telehealth use and other outcomes between the three time
periods. We propose using regression discontinuity in time (RDiT), a regression-based analysis approach
that tests for differences in outcomes between the different time periods, controlling for variables
shown to be associated with each outcome. The primary goal of this analysis is to examine whether the
SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act telehealth policy change was associated with an overall
difference in the rates of the various measured outcomes. In addition to the RDiT analysis, we propose
conducting case-control analysis to address whether outcomes differ between individuals with SUD who
received telehealth treatment compared to those who received treatment in-person only. For this
analysis, we examine differences only among beneficiaries with SUD who received any form of SUD or
MH treatment during the three time periods. Cases will be defined as those receiving any form of SUD
or MH treatment via telehealth. Controls will be selected from those who received in-person only
treatment and will be matched to cases based on propensity scores. Propensity scores will be generated
using an artificial intelligence machine learning algorithm based on patient demographic, clinical (e.g.,
type of substance), and geographic characteristics. The goal of this analysis is to examine whether
receiving these services via telehealth versus in-person only was associated with differences in the risk
of experiencing various utilization and health outcomes, including emergency department visits and
overdoses.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: No challenges identified at this time.
Contributing Division: CMS
Activity Title: Evaluation of the Value-Based Insurance Design (VBID) Model
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies reduce costs and improve quality
of health care services?
Page 33 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Activity Description/Research Questions: The VBID Model allows Medicare Advantage organizations
(MAOs) to further target benefit design to enrollees based on chronic condition and/or socioeconomic
characteristics and/or incentivize the use of Part D prescription drug benefits through rewards and
incentives. MAOs may also offer the Medicare hospice benefit to its enrollees as part of the VBID Model.
Additionally, the VBID model requires that all participating plans engage their enrollees through
structured and timely wellness and health care planning, including advanced care planning. The primary
aim of the evaluation is to rigorously assess the impact of the VBID model on enrollee health outcomes,
behavior, service use, and quality of care, and on costs to health plans, enrollees and to Medicare.
Research Questions:
Impact of the VBID Model (including Hospice component):
1) Eligibility and Enrollment:
Do participating plans enroll more or fewer enrollees over the course of the model test,
and why?
2) Utilization and health outcomes:
Does the model result in targeted enrollees consuming fewer high-intensity services,
such as emergency department visits and inpatient admissions?
Does the model improve targeted enrollees' overall health status and specific
conditions? What, if any, impact does the model have on enrollees' risk scores?
How does the hospice benefit component of the model impact the decision to elect
hospice, and the timing of hospice election, by enrollees?
How does the model affect enrollee hospice experience, as measured by visits in the last
week of life, likelihood of live discharge/transfer/revocation, among others? Where
relevant, how do these utilization patterns differ between hospice patients in MA vs
FFS?
3) Cost:
What is the model's impact on plans' cost (both medical and drug benefit)?
What is the model's effect on plans' bids, for Parts C and D?
What is the model's impact (if any) on targeted enrollees' and non-targeted enrollees'
overall cost-sharing, premiums and the availability of supplemental benefits for non-
targeted enrollees in participating plans?
What factors or variables are driving any increases or decreases in plan's costs and bids?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing - 2028
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Medicare Advantage plan enrollment/disenrollment files,
Fee-for-Service claims, Medicare Advantage Organizations encounter, Bid Pricing Tool, Provider of
Page 34 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Service, Hospice Item Set, Prescription Drug Event, Star ratings, risk scores, Reusable Framework
monitoring data (submitted by VBID plans)
Existing Data from Other Sources: CAHPS, Health Outcomes Survey, Healthcare Effectiveness Data and
Information Set
New Data Collection: Semi-structured interviews with participating and non-participating plans, in-
network and out-of-network hospices, other VBID providers, and beneficiaries
Study Design or Approach: Our evaluation of the VBID model test takes a mixed-methods approach by
integrating primary qualitative data with secondary quantitative data to assess the model test's effects
on key outcomes. This approach allows us to observe, from multiple angles, the experiences of MAOs,
beneficiaries, and providers with the model test and develop a more complete picture of the potential
benefits and drawbacks of VBID in the Medicare population. MAOs that offer VBID through the model
test are required to submit information on beneficiary participation to CMMI's Reusable Framework
reporting system. We will use these data to calculate the number of VBID-eligible beneficiaries in
participating MAOs, the share of VBID-eligible beneficiaries who participated in the model test (versus
opting out or not completing participation requirements), and changes over time in participation rates.
We will use difference-in-differences regression models to estimate whether MAOs that participated in
VBID and their eligible beneficiaries experienced changes in outcomes relative to a matched comparison
group. Our analyses will estimate how MAOs' participation in the VBID model test affected outcomes.
For most analyses, we will pool all VBID-participating MAOs and beneficiaries (and their matched
comparators) into a single regression. As a result, the "treatment" effect is generally exposure to any
VBID intervention implemented by a participating MAO, rather than exposure to a specific VBID design.
The hospice component will be evaluated separately. Finally, we will characterize the experience of
beneficiaries, providers, and MAOs with VBID through a series of semi-structured telephone interviews.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The evaluation relies on encounter data submitted by
MAOs. While quality of these data has improved in recent years, the ongoing time lag (approximately
24-month runout period) delays answering key questions related to utilization. While the hospice
component will be separately evaluated, the other flexibilities embodied in VBID are evaluated
collectively even though there is variation in how they are used by participating MAOs. Thus, our
evaluation of the VBID "proper" (non-hospice) speaks to access to the overall suite of flexibilities rather
than the impact of any single one or subset of mechanisms.
Contributing Division: FDA
Activity Title: Modeling the evolution of the U.S. opioid crisis for national policy development
HHS Priority Questions: How do HHS policies and programs promote healthy lifestyle choices to reduce
occurrence and disparities in preventable injury, illness, and death?
Page 35 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Activity Description/Research Questions: This is a modeling activity with a systems approach to capture
major dynamics in the opioid crisis, to be able to assess short term and long term, intended and
unintended consequences of potential policies
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): 2019 - Ongoing
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: N/A
Existing Data from Other Sources: IQVIA, NSSATS, NFLIS, TEDS-A, NVSS, NBER, Symphony Health,
NSDUH
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: The model has been built using System Dynamics methodology, which is a
differential equation simulation modeling technique. Additional data science techniques and methods
have been used to prepare and utilize the data for this model.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Data scarcity in this arena remains the biggest
challenge (i.e., we lack true longitudinal, national level drug use data). Other challenges include lack of
comprehensive understanding on some of the underlying behavioral dynamics.
Contributing Division: FDA
Activity Title: Outcome Measures Integration Workgroup/Food Safety Dashboard
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS programs and policies improve the promotion of effective
enterprise governance to ensure programmatic goals are met equitably and transparently across all
management practices?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The OMI workgroup is responsible for implementing
measures to track the progress of the Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA). The Workgroup utilizes
the Food Safety Dashboard to monitor progress and performance towards achieving key outcomes over
time. The research Question is: How can HHS programs and policies best protect the food and medical
supply chains?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): 2016 - Ongoing Existing Data Sources
Held by the Division: Domestic and Foreign PCHF Inspections (including classifications); Domestic and
Imported Recall Events (Class I and II); Foreign Supplier Verification Program (FSVP) Inspections
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: The FDA has finalized seven major rules to implement FSMA, recognizing
that ensuring the safety of both the human and animal food supply is a shared responsibility among
many different parties at various points in the global supply chain. The FSMA rules outline specific
Page 36 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
actions the food industry must take at each of these points to prevent contamination. For each rule, the
FDA has identified measures that will help to evaluate how well the regulations are being implemented
and where there could be room for improvement. The agency anticipates these performance measures
will evolve and improve over time as the agency and its partners continue to implement FSMA and
collect more and better-quality data. FDA will update the Food Safety Dashboard on a quarterly basis.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The compliance dates for the FSMA rules were
staggered over time, largely based on business size, and some entities still have not reached certain
compliance dates. Routine inspections for others may only just be starting. This means that the early
data collected based on these performance measures will reflect the current status of implementation.
Depending on the measure, it may take several years to establish baselines and identify meaningful
trends in FSMA implementation.
Contributing Division: HRSA
Activity Title: Healthy Start (HS) Evaluation & Capacity Building Support
HHS Priority Questions: What are the impacts of HHS programs and policies on strengthening early
childhood development and expanding opportunities to help children and youth thrive equitably within
their families and communities?
Activity Description/Research Questions: This effort is a four-year national evaluation of the HS
program applying implementation, utilization, outcome, and transformative evaluation approaches to
determine the effectiveness of the program. The social ecological model is used as the framework
to
assess characteristics, behaviors, and activities at the individual level (e.g., use of program services), the
organizational level (e.g., HS initiatives), the community level (e.g., HS Community Action Networks),
and the larger social-structural level (e.g., policies, systems, structural environment). Results of the
evaluation will be used to inform decision-making and develop recommendations to improve
implementation of the HS program. The research question is: To what extent are HHS programs
associated with improved health status among participants served, and how effective are HHS programs
in addressing maternal and infant health disparities?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Sept 2021 - Sept 2025
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Healthy Start Monitoring & Evaluation Data System
(HSMED); - Reporting system for participant-level data received on a monthly basis:
- Based on information provided in the Healthy Start Data Collection Forms (Background Form,
Prenatal Form, Parent/Child Form)
- Contains demographic, participant behavior, healthcare utilization, access, and perinatal
outcomes data
Page 37 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS)
- Collects grantee-level data on annual basis
- Addresses MCHB-wide and HS program-specific performance measures
Existing Data from Other Sources: CDC Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS)
New Data Collection: Quantitative and qualitative data collected from Healthy Start grantees and their
stakeholders via web-based surveys, semi-structured interviews, and site visit assessments
Study Design or Approach: The evaluation will use a mixed methods approach: for much of the
implementation and utilization evaluation, HSMED data, DGIS data, and the Program Staff Survey will be
analyzed to provide descriptive statistics and determine associations. Grantee reports, stakeholder
interviews, and network analysis will inform the implementation and transformative evaluation
components. The outcome evaluation will measure the impact of HS on participant health outcomes
using dosage analysis. Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The HS grantees have varying
levels of organizational data and evaluation capacity based on level of experience with the program and
other factors. An organizational assessment was conducted that identified challenges in collecting and
submitted required data, time and effort required, staff experience, and variations in data systems. The
evaluation design includes a risk mitigation plan to address these challenges that includes technical
assistance provided by the evaluation contractor and the HS TA & Support Center.
Contributing Division: HRSA
Activity Title: Collaborative Health Equity Measurement (CHEM) Project in Maternal and Child Health
HHS Priority Questions: What are the impacts of HHS programs and policies on strengthening early
childhood development and expanding opportunities to help children and youth thrive equitably within
their families and communities? How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health
disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: This is an evidence-building effort to support development of
common measures for health equity in maternal and child health (MCH) and expand the capacity and
use of meaningful and practical health equity measures to track the impact of MCH programs on health
equity, for two main audiences: (1) states and communities nationwide and, (2) HRSA Maternal and
Child Health Bureau grantee programs. The activity will support measuring the baseline of health equity
in MCH populations and monitor the trend. The research question is: How can HHS health and social
services policies and programs improve equity for the Maternal and Child (MC) population in the US?
How can HHS policies and programs address upstream social determinants of health to improve overall
health status and disease burden in MC population?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): July 1, 2022 - January 1, 2024
Page 38 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: MCHB Health Equity Performance Measures and data
reported within the Child & Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative; MCHB data collection systems
for discretionary and non-discretionary grant programs; Title V Block Grant reporting related to equity
Existing Data from Other Sources:
New Data Collection: Public datasets that measure health equity and social determinants of health at
the national, state, and local level
Study Design or Approach: Direct estimation and/or small area analysis (SAE) to measure health equity
among MCH populations at the national, state, and local-level; data tables that contain national, state,
and local-level estimates for the health equity measures; stratified data to be incorporated into the
MCHB data warehouse.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: The methodology for the SAE may take time to
develop which may delay the progress of the project. To prevent it from happening, OER staff will
identify the needed datasets and the methodology while developing the contract SOW, and invite SAE
methodology experts to be on the expert panel.
Contributing Division: NIH
Activity Title: Impact Assessment - Opioid and Chronic Pain Pathways to Prevention Workshop
HHS Priority Questions: To what extent do HHS programs and policies strengthen and expand access to
mental health and substance use disorder treatment and recovery services for individuals and families?
How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and evaluation to increase evidence-
based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health disparities, and improved social
well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The NIH Office of Disease Prevention is currently conducting
an impact assessment of the recommendations that resulted from the 2014 Pathways to Prevention
(P2P) Workshop- The Role of Opioids in the Treatment of Chronic Pain. The workshop addressed four
key areas, including the long-term effectiveness of opioids; the safety and harms of opioids in patients
with chronic pain; the effects of different opioid management strategies; and the effectiveness of risk
mitigation strategies for opioid treatment. The workshop was designed to identify future research needs
and priorities to improve the treatment of pain with opioids. Results of the impact assessment will
inform how well this workshop influenced future funding in this area as well as how to improve the
design of future P2P workshops.
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Fall 2021 - Fall 2022
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: iSearch - Grants (including the Portfolio tool) iSearch -
Publications; iCite; RCDC
Existing Data from Other Sources: Almetric
Page 39 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: Three products were produced as a result of the P2P workshop which
outlined key research gaps and recommendations to address these gaps. The impact assessment will
include three components:
(1) portfolio analysis - assess NIH grant portfolio of funding announcements and research
funding post-workshop.
(2) bibliometric analysis - use citation data to assess the impact of publication of systematic
evidence review and recommendation by external panel.
(3) key leader and stakeholder interview - anecdotal insight regarding the key activities and
collaborations that resulted from the workshop proceedings and recommendations.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: It may be difficult to provide a causal link between
the recommendations and the resulting funding opportunity announcements and grants that don't
specifically cite the P2P workshop. NIH will complement the quantitative analyses with key leader and
stakeholder interviews who provided subject matter expertise during the workshop process and
oversaw/guided the resulting activities and collaborations.
Contributing Division: NIH
Activity Title: Cancer Moonshot Assessment
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health
disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The Cancer Moonshot is an exceptional opportunity to
accelerate progress in cancer prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and care. The 21st Century Cures Act
provided 7 years of funding for the initiative from FY 2017 through FY 2023. The National Cancer
Institute (NCI) is conducting a data-driven overall assessment to look at cross-Moonshot trends that will
complement ongoing and planned evaluations of a subset of individual initiatives that are occurring
throughout NCI. The overall assessment focuses on the overarching goals of the Moonshot: generating
new knowledge, fostering collaboration, and improving data sharing.
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): 2019 - 2027
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: NIH administrative funding data - grants, cooperative
agreements, contracts, and intramural research project data; Publication and clinical trials data
Existing Data from Other Sources: US patent data; Dimensions Database
New Data Collection: Data associated with data sharing metrics
Page 40 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Study Design or Approach: Impacts and outcomes of scientific funding typically become apparent years
after the investment. As a result, the assessment will be divided into two phases - phase 1 (Data
Collection, Monitoring, and Interim Reporting) is the development of an evidence base that both
supports annual reporting and will be used as an input for phase 2, the final assessment. The evidence
base will include both quantitative data and qualitative data collected through automated and manual
methods. Portfolio analysis will be conducted to understand the Cancer Moonshot investment, the
workforce funded by the Cancer Moonshot, and the outputs and achievements from the Cancer
Moonshot funds.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: In general, a challenge of this type of assessment is
the lag time between investment in research and notable societal benefit. In addition, societal benefit of
a particular investment often cannot be directly measured. This can be compensated for by the use of
surrogate measures of impact. Specific to this assessment, challenges exist in ways to measure data
sharing. A number of possible methods and metrics for this are being explored, and NIH anticipates that
new methods may be developed by the research community as there is increased use of shared data
sets.
Contributing Division: NIH
Activity Title: Analyzing the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK)
Data Science portfolio and Developing Plans for NIDDK implementation of the New NIH Data
Management and Data Sharing Policies
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health
disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: NIDDK has embarked on an evidence-based approach to: a)
evaluate current data science activities to plan for future data science needs, and b) assess the types of
data NIDDK-supported investigators generate.
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): January 2021 - January 2023
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: NIH Information for Management Planning, Analysis, and
Coordination (IMPAC II); NIDDK Data Repository; NIDDK Intramural investigators; NIH Intramural
Databases
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: NIDDK is developing a sampling algorithm that seeks to target about 20% of
all new NIDDK awards from the past five years. It will develop the algorithm to ensure that it includes a
representative sampling with respect to institution type, science type, and discipline. A data science
Page 41 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
contractor will evaluate the dataset and then answer a set of questions developed by NIDDK about the
awards.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: One challenge is balancing cost/level of effort and
informativeness. NIDDK prefers a sampling algorithm that provides the smallest set of data that is
sufficiently representative of the Institute's entire portfolio given the logistical constraints. A second
challenge is in developing a set of questions that can adequately inform both policy decisions and
strategic planning for future data science needs.
Contributing Division: ONC
Activity Title: ONC Certification Program Evidence Building
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health
disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The key goal of this project is to identify the impacts of the
ONC Health IT Certification Program on health IT. This will be an ongoing analysis of the Program
through data collection from multiple sources. The results of this analysis will be used to assess the
progress of the Program as well as inform future policy making. The research Question is: In what ways
is certification of health IT improving the access, exchange, and use of electronic health information for
patient care?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): FY 2022 - FY 2026
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: Data from the Certified Health IT Products List; Centralized
Feedback System
Existing Data from Other Sources: Health IT Surveys (e.g., AHA, NEHRS, HINTS, LOINC); CMS Promoting
Interoperability Program data
New Data Collection: Real World Testing data; EHR Reporting Program data; New Surveys
Study Design or Approach: ONC will primarily be conducting quantitative analyses, looking at progress
in key areas over time. ONC measures interoperability through healthcare providers' ability to query,
send, receive, and integrate electronic health information into their systems. In addition to exchange of
patient health records, this analysis will explore the impacts on improving exchange of health
information in areas of public health, SDOH, patient access, and other areas related to the HHS Federal
Health IT Strategic Plan.
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: In order to get a clearer picture of what is happening
in health IT interoperability, ONC will attempt to collect real world data. ONC expects challenges in the
diversity and quality of such data. Thus, ONC is working with subject matter experts to best determine
the requirements for collecting this data.
Page 42 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Contributing Division: SAMHSA
Activity Title: Internal Formative Evaluation of the Projects for Assistance in Transition from
Homelessness (PATH)I
HHS Priority Questions: How do HHS programs and policies expand equitable access to comprehensive,
community-based, innovative, and culturally-competent health care services while recognizing social
determinants of health?
Activity Description/Research Questions: The PATH evaluation report includes information on funding,
staffing, numbers served/contacted and enrolled, client demographics, service provision and service
referrals made and attainment. Data are submitted by the PATH providers via the SAMHSA PATH Data
Exchange (PDX), though parts are to be provided through local Homeless Management Information
Systems (HMIS). The PATH grantees' State PATH Contacts (SPCs) approve the data submitted by their
providers. The research question is: How can HHS health and social services programs increase access to
those experiencing homelessness?
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing annually
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: PDX
Existing Data from Other Sources: Web-based survey
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: Mixed method approach
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Delay in data collection
Contributing Division: SAMHSA
Activity Title: SAMHSA's Report to Congress on Garrett Lee Smith (GLS) Youth Suicide Prevention and
Early Intervention Program.
HHS Priority Questions: How do HHS policies and programs promote healthy lifestyle choices to reduce
occurrence and disparities in preventable injury, illness, and death?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Performance measurement and outcome evaluation to
evaluation how HHS programs can reduce suicidal ideation leading to reductions in mortality and
morbidity among youth across the country
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing annually
Page 43 of 44
FY 2023-2026 Evidence-Building Plan
Department of Health & Human Services
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: SAMHSA's Performance and Accountability Reporting
System (SPARS), Infrastructure Development, Prevention and Mental Health Promotion (IPP) measures
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: Examination of program data over time and with particular emphasis on
priority and high risk populations
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Delay in data collection
Contributing Division: SAMHSA
Activity Title: Performance Measurement of SAMHSA's discretionary grants (40-50 Program Profiles)
HHS Priority Questions: How can HHS programs and policies improve data collection, use, and
evaluation to increase evidence-based knowledge that leads to better health outcomes, reduced health
disparities, and improved social well-being, equity, and economic resilience?
Activity Description/Research Questions: Performance measurement, portfolio analysis, and data
dissemination to understand how the ongoing assessment of clients' demographic and associated early
outcomes data can help HHS leaders to make data-driven decisions.
Time Period for the Activity (estimated start and end dates): Ongoing annually
Existing Data Sources Held by the Division: SPARS
Existing Data from Other Sources: N/A
New Data Collection: N/A
Study Design or Approach: The profiles share descriptive data, frequencies and formative evaluation
data including short term outcomes
Anticipated Challenges and Mitigation Strategies: Delay in data collection due to COVID-19 pandemic
Page 44 of 44
