U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
HHS Equity Action Plan
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Mission
The mission of HHS is to enhance the health and well-being of all Americans, by
providing for effective health and human services and by fostering sound, sustained
advances in the sciences underlying medicine, public health, and social services.
Summary of Action Plan
Executive Order 13985 calls on agencies to advance equity through identifying and
addressing barriers to equal opportunity that underserved communities may face due
to government policies and programs. This Equity Action Plan focuses on a main tenet
of EO 13985, that advancing equity must be a central component of the decision-mak-
ing framework that all agency functions are routed through. Using the definition of
equity presented in EO 13985,¹ this plan takes the perspective that it is incumbent on
HHS to move urgently to assess and change policies, programs and processes that the
Department administers to concretely advance equity and that for these efforts to
last, HHS must simultaneously shift the culture, resources, and approaches available
to HHS staff to institutionalize and sustain a focus on equity over time. This Equity
Action Plan does not describe comprehensively how all HHS components are working
to advance equity, but instead highlights a few examples across the Department.
The Equity Action Plan was developed with cross-cutting department conversations
and is designed to take concrete action to transform how HHS does business in ways
that promote and advance equity through building on work that is already underway
1. Section 2(a) of EO 13985 provides that, "The term 'equity' means the consistent and systematic fair,
just, and impartial treatment of all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved commu-
nities that have been denied such treatment, such as Black, Latino, and Indigenous and Native Amer-
ican persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and other persons of color; members of religious
minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities;
persons who live in rural areas; and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or in-
equality." Further, section 2(b) provides that, "the term "underserved communities' refers to populations
sharing a particular characteristic, as well as geographic communities, that have been systematically
denied a full opportunity to participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life, as exemplified by
the list in the preceding definition of 'equity."
SERVICES.US
S
Page 1 lApril 2022
HHS Equity Action Plan
and implementing new actions. The plan describes actions that can be taken now
with current resources and ways the Department can work to further advance
equity in the future through strategies such as building data capacity, expanding
stakeholder engagement, increasing our understanding of root causes of inequities
and ongoing evaluation of our efforts. This plan is also written with an acknowl-
edgement that all HHS equity-related efforts are not captured here, and the select
inclusion of strategies is designed to be both a starting point and illustrative of the
deep and wide actions to advance equity. Additionally, future in-vestments, such as
those which may require new technology for example, are subject to the availability
of funding.
Based on guidance from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and build-
ing on the Department's previous work, the strategies included here were selected
as illustrative examples of HHS's wide actions to advance equity and focus on the
areas of civil rights and language access, acquisitions, grants, capacity building, and
maternal mortality.
Focusing on civil rights protections and laws will help address barriers to
heath care and human services, such as those individuals with limited English
proficiency face in obtaining information, services and/or benefits from HHS
federally conducted and federally assisted programs.
Working to address acquisitions will focus on increasing opportunity to HHS
contracting for small disadvantaged businesses and Historically Underutilized
Business Zone Small Businesses.
Using our grants will support incorporating equity considerations into Notice
of Funding Opportunities.
Concentrating on capacity building helps incorporate equity into HHS policy
and program actions, including by conducting equity assessments and disparity
impact strategies.
Prioritizing maternal mortality action addresses the increased pregnancy
and postpartum morbidity and mortality among Black and American Indian/
Alaska Native (AI/AN) pregnant and childbearing people by focusing on working
with states to extend health insurance coverage in Medicaid and the Children's
Health Insurance Program for all enrollees who give birth and developing
innovative ways to improve postpartum care.
While there are many additional efforts HHS is undertaking to focus on equity, this
Equity Action Plan focuses on these five areas as an example of HHS's commitment
to advance equity in all aspects of our work.
SERVICES-US
B
2
HHS Equity Action Plan
SUMMARY OF EARLY ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Since the release of EO 13985 on January 20, 2021, HHS has focused on taking steps
to continually advance equity, which is a top priority for President Biden and HHS
Secretary Becerra. First, as required by EO 13985, four HHS offices have conducted
pilot equity assessments examining equity in their respective programs and poli-
cies, which covered administered grants, contracting, postpartum care, and Benefit
Enrollment Centers connecting Medicare beneficiaries with limited incomes to
needed benefits. These efforts were used as an opportunity to test what equity as-
sessment methods and approaches are viable across HHS and identify what is nec-
essary to institutionalize robust equity assessments into our policy, program, and
process decision-making.
HHS is incorporating equity into all facets of its work across the Department. As
part of this work, HHS is working to increase engagement with individuals who
are directly affected by HHS policy and programs. For example, as directed by EO
13995, HHS established the COVID-19 Health Equity Task Force, which included
12 non-federal members representing a diversity of expertise and lived experience.
HHS is also examining ways to address inequities through steps such as guiding
implementation of procurement contracts for American Indian/Alaska Native-
owned and controlled businesses, and streamlining Medicaid and CHIP enrollment
and renewal processes. In addition, through its Office for Civil Rights (OCR), the
Department is engaged in efforts to clarify and enforce nondiscrimination provi-
sions across the Department. For example, in May 2021, OCR issued a Notification
of Interpretation and Enforcement of Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act and
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, establishing that it would enforce
the prohibition against sex discrimination to include sexual orientation and gender
identity consistent with the recent Supreme Court decision in Bostock V. Clayton
County. During FY 2021, OCR led HHS implementation of Executive Order 13988:
Preventing and Combating Discrimination on the Basis of Gender Identity
or Sexual Orientation, by coordinating and engaging with all of HHS's operating
divisions and agencies to highlight and note those actions to be revised, suspended,
or rescinded to be consistent with the order.
HHS is also engaged in many other initiatives related to incorporating equity into
policy action, including:
1. Office of Climate Change and Health Equity: On August 30, 2021, under the
direction of President Biden and the Assistant Secretary for Health, the Office
of Climate Change and Health Equity (OCCHE) was established within HHS.
SERVICES-US
S
3
HHS Equity Action Plan
OCCHE addresses the impact of climate change on the health of the American
people and serves as a department-wide hub for climate change and health
policy, programming, and analysis, in pursuit of environmental justice and
equitable health outcomes.
2. Equity Impact Assessments in the Legislative Process: For the first time this
year, equity impact assessments were incorporated into HHS's A-19 process, in
which the Department develops legislative proposals for consideration to include
in the President's Budget. HHS offices were given tools to help them complete
the equity impact sections of the A-19 templates and identify the potential
equity impacts of proposals. Lessons from the process in 2021 are being used
to enhance and refine these efforts in future years.
3. National Institutes of Health (NIH) UNITE: NIH established the UNITE
initiative to identify and address structural racism within the NIH-supported
and the greater scientific community. With representation from across the NIH
Institutes and Centers, UNITE aims to establish an equitable and civil culture
within the biomedical research enterprise and reduce barriers to racial equity
in the biomedical research workforce. To reach this goal, UNITE is facilitating
research to identify opportunities, make recommendations, and develop and
implement strategies to increase inclusivity and diversity in science. These
efforts will bolster the NIH's effort to continue to strive for diversity within
the scientific workforce and racial equity on the NIH campus and within the
extramural community.
4. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Health Equity Inventory: CMS
Office of Minority Health (OMH) launched a Health Equity Inventory to provide
an environmental scan of its overall current health equity portfolio, including
identifying ongoing activities in health equity performed across the agency,
health equity staff leads, resources, areas of potential collaborations, challenges,
and opportunities.
5. Minority Health Social Vulnerability Index (SVI): In 2021, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and HHS Office of Minority Health partnered to
develop the Minority Health SVI, which enhances existing resources to support
the identification of racial and ethnic communities at the greatest risk for
disproportionate impact and adverse outcomes due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
SERVICES.D'
<<
4
HHS Equity Action Plan
EQUITY ACTION PLAN
1. Nondiscrimination in HHS: Civil Rights Protections
and Language Access
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes: Under Secretary Becerra's leadership, HHS has
prioritized restoring efforts to provide language access services appropriate to their
respective programs. For example, for the first time HHS provided the "Medicare &
You" handbook in other languages and increased language access efforts on health-
care.gov. Still, language access is a moving target that requires continued attention
and adjustments to strategy and methods. As part of this work, HHS will work to
restore and strengthen its cross-department Language Access Plan. For example,
some components produce substantial amounts of translated material while others
rely primarily on telephonic interpretation, but all components struggle with pro-
viding support in less frequently spoken languages and adding material in additional
languages as the need arises. Further, while the need for providing language access
services to individuals with LEP is clear, meeting those needs is difficult. For exam-
ple, while some HHS websites contain content and taglines in multiple languages,
LEP visitors to our sites still have difficulty navigating webpages and/or obtaining
language access services to communicate with HHS. In many cases visitors are
unaware that language access services are available. HHS also has limited ability
currently to assess outcomes in real time, therefore agency language access plans
include an element specifically focused on assessing the accessibility and quality of
its language access efforts to improve agency capacity to serve individuals with LEP.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier: For the purposes of this Equity Action
Plan, HHS will focus on addressing barriers that individuals with LEP face in ob-
taining information, services and/or benefits from HHS federally conducted pro-
grams (e.g., the 1-800-MEDICARE number where the services are provided directly
by CMS) and federally assisted programs (e.g., Medicaid, where CMS funding allows
a beneficiary to receive health care services from a private provider). HHS will ad-
dress the following items:
Access to in-language content through webpages, listserv announcements,
and public outreach material;
Telephonic interpreter services;
Program and benefit information in other languages; and
Federal funding for recipients of HHS funds to provide language access services.
Title VI requires recipients of HHS federal financial assistance to take reasonable
SERVICES.DE
S
5
HHS Equity Action Plan
steps to provide meaningful access to their programs by individuals with LEP. In
its federally conducted programs, HHS aims to model the same level of language
access as that required of those who receive HHS funds. Although Title VI does not
apply to programs conducted by federal agencies, under current regulations imple-
menting Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), programs conducted by the
Department under Title I of ACA must take reasonable steps to provide meaningful
access to their programs by individuals with LEP. The scope of this requirement may
change in future Section 1557 rulemaking.
Tracking Progress:
Medium-term indicators (2-4 years):
Establish how funding for language access services can be distributed in
compliance with federal law;
Establish HHS-wide procedures for providing telephonic interpreter services;
Establish website accessibility guidance for HHS Staff Divisions (STAFFDIVS)
and Operating Divisions (OPDIVS). STAFFDIVS in the Office of the Secretary
will provide leadership, direction, and policy and management guidance to the
Department. OPDIVS are agencies that provide funding through grant awards,
loans, health insurance, and services in support of public health and human
service initiatives. In HHS there are 16 STAFFDIVS and 11 OPDIVS;
Establish an action plan for pushing out in-language program and benefit
information; and
Establish goals for funding language access services internally and externally.
Long-term indicators (5-8 years):
Every OPDIV and STAFFDIV will have Help Lines supported by telephonic
interpreters;
More LEP callers to HHS Help Lines will receive meaningful access to success-
fully reach and obtain services from the desired program offices;
Every OPDIV and STAFFDIV will post in-language webpages;
Each year OPDIVS and STAFFDIVS will add webpages in frequently encountered
languages;
Every OPDIV and STAFFDIV website will link to in-language program information;
More LEP visitors to HHS websites will find material in their language and infor-
mation on how to obtain language access services from the program agency;
HHS grant programs will aim to provide funding to help recipients of Federal
SERVICES.UC
S
6
HHS Equity Action Plan
financial assistance provide language access services, at a minimum where legal-
ly required; and
LEP visitors to programs conducted or funded by HHS will receive language
access services at no cost, at a minimum where legally required.
Accountability: Full implementation of the HHS Language Access Plan will re-
sult in a Department-wide culture change that prioritizes equity in the delivery of
HHS conducted and funded programs, which will ultimately contribute to improved
health outcomes and reduced health disparities for underserved communities iden-
tified in EO 13985. To ensure HHS makes progress, the OCR Director will oversee
these efforts and will annually report to the Secretary. The OCR Director will:
Designate an office or official responsible for developing and maintaining an
accurate record of a program that regularly assesses and takes necessary steps
to improve and ensure the quality and accuracy of language access services
provided to individuals with LEP.
Track implementation methods for measuring improvements in language
access in individual programs and take steps to ensure that such information is
collected in a manner that increases comparability, accuracy, and consistency
across programs. Agencies can determine whether it is appropriate for this
element to be implemented by the same office or official responsible for
implementing another element.
Take steps to address problems identified in OCR investigations of LEP
complaints filed against HHS.
Identify best practices for continuous quality improvement regarding agency
language access services. Share such practices with the Steering Committee,
which may offer them as guidance to HHS components, grantees, contractors,
and recipients as appropriate.
Identify and disseminate data to the Steering Committee to help other
HHS components facilitate organization-wide learning and coordination,
collaboration on high impact outreach, or developing cross-cutting audience-
appropriate messaging to mutual customer communities.
2. Acquisitions
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes: Assessments conducted by HHS on whether
underserved communities and their members face systematic barriers in apply-
ing for contract opportunities revealed several areas where small disadvantaged
businesses, as defined by the Small Business Act (SBA) and its implementing
regulations, face barriers to applying for HHS procurement opportunities. These
barriers include:
SERVICES-US
B
7
HHS Equity Action Plan
Agency acquisition planning leaves short timelines to build proposed
solutions and create teaming arrangements to be competitive for contracting
opportunities with the smaller teams and budgets that these businesses have
Lack of transparency on available contracting opportunities and agency
requirements creating barriers when these businesses do not have as much
experience working with agencies
Lack of access to agency program officials to market company capabilities
Businesses lack adequate access to capital to build business development
capabilities
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier: Based on the barriers identified in
the assessment, HHS has identified two (2) discrete and impactful actions that will
begin to reduce equity barriers and increase opportunities for small disadvantaged
businesses to apply for contracts within HHS procurement programs.
HHS will focus its efforts on:
1. Assessing barriers for small disadvantaged businesses in applying for HHS
contract opportunities and providing training and outreach to address these
barriers. This can help small disadvantaged businesses learn more about agen-
cy requirements, agency points of contact, and available resources to advance
their capabilities.
2. Instituting an HHS centralized procurement forecasting system that will
streamline access to forecasted opportunities. HHS Small Business Specialists
will ensure these opportunities are posted and available for public review prior
to conducting the small business review required for actions over the Simplified
Acquisition Threshold (SAT). This will help to ensure that small disadvantaged
businesses are informed about contracting opportunities early on to ensure they
have the most time possible to develop proposals. It will also minimize the bur-
den of identifying available HHS contracting opportunities.
Tracking Progress:
Medium-term indicators:
For action 1:
-
Conducting small business reviews for all actions that will be issued against
multiple award contracts including Government-Wide Acquisition Contracts
(GWACs) and agency specific Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity con-
tracts. By reviewing these actions, HHS Small Business Specialists will be able
to identify significant opportunities to address additional barriers faced by
SERVICES.CE
S
8
HHS Equity Action Plan
small disadvantaged businesses. To measure the effectiveness of this action,
HHS will review the awards made against multiple award contracts or GWACs
at least quarterly, sharing this information with the HHS Head of Contracting
Activities (HCAs) so they are aware of the progress of their organization.
-
Increase outreach to underserved areas across the US and increase use of
market research tools to identify pools of small disadvantaged businesses
capable of performing targeted HHS SAT opportunities.
-
HHS will develop training initiatives for the acquisition workforce on utiliz-
ing small businesses and market research analysis.
-
No later than 04/01/2022, HHS will also conduct targeted Program
Management Reviews on small business opportunities and small business
contract awards, which is inclusive of small disadvantaged businesses.
-
No later than 04/01/2022, the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business
Utilization (OSDBU) will conduct targeted training for HHS Small Business
Specialists and Contracting Officers on the utilization of small businesses.
For action 2:
-
To help address this barrier for small disadvantage businesses, effective
05/01/2022, HHS will require all forecasted opportunities to integrate with-
in the centralized HHS-wide Small Business Customer Experience (SBCX)
forecasting system so the small business industrial base has a single point of
entry for upcoming procurements.
-
In accordance with Section 501 of Public Law 100-656, HHS will modify
its internal policies no later than 05/01/2022 and require that the forecast
opportunities be posted in SBCX as soon as the need is identified and no
later than August timeframe for the next fiscal year's opportunities with
updates. As appropriate, HHS will require updates on entries to be made
no later than March 30th to ensure the most up-to-date information about
upcoming procurement opportunities is made available to small business
concerns on a regular and recurring basis. Further, this policy will require
completed posting of opportunities prior to the required Small Business
Specialist review.
- To monitor compliance and track progress, the OSDBU will compare infor-
mation available on the SBCX forecast with information provided during
the Small Business Specialist reviews of individual procurements to ensure
information has been posted to SBCX in a timely manner. In addition, the
HHS Office of Acquisitions will include compliance with this requirement as
a part of their regularly scheduled Procurement Management Reviews.
SERVICES.UE
S
9
HHS Equity Action Plan
Long-term indicators:
For actions 1 and 2:
- Reduced barriers to contracting and subcontracting opportunities for small
disadvantaged businesses and small businesses located in HUBZones.
Accountability: ASFR's Associate Deputy Assistant Secretary for Acquisitions, the
Director of the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization oversee these
efforts and report progress on indicators to the HHS Secretary.
For all actions, HHS will create executive communication mediums by 10/01/2022
that track progress based on regular SAM.gov data pulls and other related activities
such as Small Business Specialist reviews and queries against SBCX.
3. Grants
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes: HHS made $620 billion in financial assis-
tance awards in FY2O. When examining grant processes, there is an apparent lack
of diversity in applicants as well as successful awardees, with the same entities
frequently receiving awards. Based on analysis of past general concerns raised
by external entities, there are several suspected root causes for the lack of di-
versity. These include overly burdensome provisions in the Notices of Funding
Opportunity (NOFOs), difficult to understand NOFOs, and a lack of technical as-
sistance for the overall application process. When conducting their equity assess-
ment, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources (ASFR) found
tribal communities often have difficulty meeting the service population require-
ments, match requirements, and/or are under-resourced to apply and successfully
compete for grant awards. It is suspected that many other underserved commu-
nities, as defined by EO 13985, also experience similar barriers to accessing grant
funds. Some suggestions from tribal consultations to improve the grantmaking
process that may be helpful to improve opportunity include:
Decreasing reporting burdens associated with funding, such as through
streamlining reporting systems that may be associated with multiple grants.
Assisting interested applicants in applying and taking advantage of funding
opportunities through technical assistance, outreach, and education to ensure all
communities are aware of funding opportunities and prepared to apply for them.
Increasing grant offices' and grant reviewers' understanding of tribal and
underserved communities, their needs, and cultures, to help ensure that
lack of familiarity with organizations or entities does not itself unfairly
disadvantage applicants.
SERVICES.UE
S
10
HHS Equity Action Plan
Providing training on the different ways to meet the non-federal match
requirements when they cannot be eliminated. For example, donating space to
administer a program.
HHS is investigating strategies for addressing these barriers. As part of its Fiscal
Year 2022 annual NOFO guidance for HHS awarding agencies, ASFR issued guid-
ance on how to incorporate equity considerations into NOFOs. This internal HHS
guidance is intended to begin to address inequities in HHS grantmaking processes
that may serve as barriers to equal opportunity. For example, it includes guidance on
the potential use of data driven disparity impact statements to address how grantee
projects will reach its intended populations, including underserved communities
as defined in E.O. 13985. The guidance urges agencies to consider their strategy for
providing technical assistance to potential applicants under each NOFO to ensure
that the assistance equitably reaches eligible organizations and communities. ASFR
is also in the process of developing a NOFO writing training for HHS agencies to
improve NOFO quality overall and address equity considerations.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier: HHS grant-making divisions will in-
corporate ASFR's 2022 guidance into their NOFOs, which includes considerations
for increasing opportunity for successful applicants from communities defined in
EO 13985. The information included in the NOFO guidance and subsequent tech-
nical assistance is informed by the equity assessment conducted by ASFR's Office
of Grants. ASFR is conducting data collection and analysis via historical reviews
of HHS NOFOs, external and internal stakeholder outreach, and a review of data
from the various grants systems. This data will establish a baseline for the im-
provement of major issues impacting equitable opportunity in the grantmaking
process, including the NOFO process, in order to develop comprehensive policies.
ASFR is determining whether we have historical data available to analyze unsuc-
cessful applications and whether we can determine patterns in the reasons for lack
of success. Short record retention schedules for unsuccessful applications may
hamper this analysis.
Tracking Progress:
Short-term indicators: Sampled HHS NOFOs include language that reflects
ASFR's 2022 guidance.
Medium-term indicators: HHS will develop an analysis of the historical NOFO
review to provide guidance to HHS on where to pinpoint immediate changes to
NOFO development across HHS. HHS will also complete analysis of data from
grant systems including unsuccessful applications and conduct outreach to
both external and internal stakeholders to further inform policy changes. The
SERVICES.UE
S
11
HHS Equity Action Plan
data developed from these Medium-term activities will provide a baseline by
which HHS can measure improvements in the diversity in both applicants and
awardees among many equity indicators.
Long-term indicators: HHS receives increased grant and cooperative agreement
applications proposing to serve underserved communities as defined in EO 13985.
Accountability: ASFR's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Grants will oversee these
efforts and the ASFR will report progress on indicators to the HHS Secretary.
4. Capacity Building
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes: HHS currently lacks the data and equity
assessment capacity to consistently identify and address inequities in health and
human services. Equity assessments are data informed assessments of inequi-
ties and disparities in HHS programs, including entitlement programs such as
Medicare and Medicaid, and such assessments highlight opportunities for HHS to
address them. For example, an equity assessment may focus on assessing equitable
access to Medicare benefits for eligible populations and developing strategies for
addressing identified barriers. Many components of HHS have not yet conducted
an equity assessment to identify inequities in their programs and work towards
addressing them. Further, HHS has found that components need practical tools
and guides to help them get started and deploy robust approaches to identify-
ing and addressing barriers to opportunities, access, quality, care and outcomes.
This work can be time and resource-intensive and offices conducting equity as-
sessments frequently cited the need to bring on additional staff and contractor
capacity to be able to conduct equity assessments and begin to address inequities
found through the assessment. To address these challenges and ensure that all
of HHS has the information necessary to address inequities in their work, HHS
will be focusing on resourcing and implementing equity assessments across the
Departments major policies and programs.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier: At least one equity assessment will be
conducted by each OPDIV.
Tracking Progress:
Medium-term indicators:
Development of resources to assist offices in conducting equity assessments
and address the findings through the establishment of an Equity Technical
Assistance Center.
SERVICES.DE
S
12
HHS Equity Action Plan
Number of HHS OPDIVs implementing an equity assessment.
Actions taken to remove or address barriers to equity and opportunity identified
in equity assessments conducted by OPDIVs.
Long-term indicators:
Number of HHS OPDIVs tracking progress on outcomes that they are seeking to
improve to address findings of an equity assessment.
Decreases in documented inequities found under initial equity assessments.
Accountability: The Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) will
oversee these efforts and report progress on indicators to the HHS Secretary, and
included in publicly available reports, as appropriate.
5. Maternal Mortality
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes: Medicaid covers 42 percent of all births over-
all with two-thirds of births to Black or African American and AI/AN women.
Pregnancy related deaths are two to three times more common among Black or
African American and AI/AN women than among White women.2 Research has
shown Black and Hispanic people have lower rates of postpartum follow-up care,
as do those with low levels of education and/or coexisting morbidities such as men-
tal health conditions. When examining postpartum depression, approximately 13
percent of postpartum women experience depression, with higher self-reported
rates among women of color (Black: 18.2%, White: 11.4%, Hispanic: 12.0%, American
Indian or Alaskan Native: 22.0%, Other: 16.3%) and low-income women, and rates
that vary from state to state. Black women were found to have among the lowest
postpartum diabetes screening rates (Black: 33%, White: 35%, Hispanic: 45%, Asian:
50%) despite having the highest risk for progression to chronic diabetes.³
More than one-half of pregnancy-related mortality occurs in the 12-month post-
partum period and about one-third occurs between 7 and 365 days post-delivery.
Postpartum care is a critical opportunity to address and provide follow up for condi-
tions associated with morbidity and mortality in the postpartum period.4
There are many barriers for Black or African American and AI/AN people in
 2. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternal-mortality/disparities-pregnancy-related-deaths/
infographic.html; https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternal-mortality/pregnancy-mortality-surv
ance-system.htm#race-ethnicity
3. https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/quality-of-care/downloads/mih-expert-workgroup-recommenda-
tions.pdf
4. ttps://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/quality-of-care/downloads/mih-expert-workgroup-recommenda-
tions.pdf
SERVICES-US
B
13
HHS Equity Action Plan
accessing and receiving high quality postpartum care. With respect to insurance
coverage, Medicaid provides pregnancy-related coverage for eligible beneficiaries for
60 days postpartum. At the end of the 60 days, many beneficiaries are left without
insurance, especially in states that have not expanded Medicaid eligibility to low-in-
come adults. The loss of insurance comes at a critical time with almost 12% of post-
partum deaths occurring between 43-365 days postpartum.5 Other barriers include
transportation, child care, and lack of paid leave.6 Extending coverage would allow
all eligible beneficiaries, including but not limited to underserved communities iden-
tified in EO 13985, coverage to get the follow up care they need.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier: HHS is responding to this challenge by
focusing on working with states to extend postpartum coverage in Medicaid and the
Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and on identifying innovative ways to
improve postpartum care for Black or African American and American Indian/
Alaska Native (AI/AN) people enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP. This coverage would
be comprehensive, and would include, follow-up care for diabetes, postpartum
depression and/or postpartum anxiety, hypertension and substance use disorders
(SUD).
CMS is working with states adopting the state plan option provided by the American
Rescue Plan Act, which provides continuous extended postpartum coverage in Medicaid
and CHIP. This option will allow states to improve access to coverage by providing
individuals who are enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP while pregnant with 12 months
of postpartum coverage, instead of the required 60-day postpartum period. Written
guidance on extending Medicaid/CHIP coverage was issued in December 2021 (State
Health Official Letter #21-007). CMS regularly engages states regarding implementa-
tion, including through a Medicaid and CHIP Coverage Learning Collaborative meeting
in December, 2021 and by providing technical assistance to individual states.
Through the HHS Racial Equity in Postpartum Care Challenge (Challenge), the
Office of Women's Health (OWH), in partnership with the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS), is soliciting challenge entries to serve as examples of ef-
fective programs and practices to reduce disparities and improve outcomes for post-
partum Black or African American and AI/AN people enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP
through emphasizing follow-up care for conditions associated with morbidity and
mortality in the later postpartum period, including diabetes, postpartum depression
and/or postpartum anxiety, hypertension, and substance use disorders (SUD).
 5. https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/quality-of-care/downloads/mih-expert-workgroup-recommen
dations.pdf
 6. https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/quality-of-care/downloads/strategies-to-improve-postpar-
tum-care.pdf
SERVICES-US
B
14
HHS Equity Action Plan
Tracking Progress:
Medium-term indicators:
The Challenge consists of two phases and will finish in Spring 2023. During
that time:
-
CMS and OWH will identify successful programs that can serve as models
for quality improvement
-
CMS and OWH will share information about those programs with state
Medicaid and CHIP agencies and their partners, through avenues like CMS'
Maternal and Infant Health Initiative Postpartum Care Learning
Collaborative.
CMS will track the number of technical assistance engagements provided by
CMS to states to assist with implementation of the option to extend Medicaid/
CHIP coverage to 12 months postpartum.
Long-term indicators:
Higher rates of postpartum follow-up care among Black or African American and
AI/AN people. (Data source: Medicaid and CHIP administrative data)
Lower rates of postpartum morbidity and pregnancy related deaths. (Data
sources: Public health surveillance data, vital records, maternal mortality review
boards)
Adoption of postpartum coverage extension by all states that want to extend
this coverage while the statutory authority is available. (Data source: CMS state
plan amendment approvals)
Accountability: The Challenge competition will conclude in Spring 2023. CMS
will review the entries and showcase successful strategies to health administrators
and providers to support the adoption of effective approaches to engaging Black or
African American and AI/AN individuals in postpartum care. Information about
states with approved state plan amendments to extend postpartum coverage will be
available on Medicaid.gov.
SERVICES.D'
<<
15
