The
EQUITY ACTION PLAN
U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development
OF
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
WASHINGTON, DC 20410
Table of Contents
Executive Summary
2
Early Accomplishments
4
Procurement
6
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
6
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
6
Tracking Progress
7
Fair Housing and Civil Rights Resources
9
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
9
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
10
Tracking Progress
10
Accountability
11
Homeownership
12
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
12
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
12
Tracking Progress
13
Accountability
14
Homelessness
15
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
15
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
15
Tracking Progress
16
Accountability
16
www.hud.gov
espanol.hud.gov
P a g e 2
Executive Summary
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) mission is to create strong,
sustainable, inclusive communities and quality affordable homes for all. Meeting the aspiration
of this goal requires that HUD prioritizes people in communities otherwise underserved by
federal programs. HUD is working to strengthen the housing market to bolster the economy and
protect consumers; meet the need for quality affordable rental homes; utilize housing as a
platform to improve quality of life; build inclusive and sustainable communities free from
discrimination; and transform the way HUD does business.
While current HUD leadership recognizes the extraordinary legacy, mission, and potential the
Department brings to building equitable communities across the nation, we also recognize
several of HUD's core programs were implemented and operated for decades in a manner that
enabled discriminatory practices against people of color and members of other protected class
groups. The Biden-Harris Administration's HUD is eager to use HUD's authorities to reverse the
deep-seated detriment caused by prior federal policies and prioritize equity in all HUD programs.
HUD's action plan responds to the request in Executive Order 13985 as implemented by the
Office of Management and Budget to specifically address (1) procurement and (2) resources to
the agency's civil rights unit, the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO). Access
to federal contracting opportunities can support economic growth and wealth building for
members of underserved communities. HUD's fair housing and civil rights work has a broad
scope and touches every person in this country. Furthermore, the underlying mission of FHEO is
squarely focused on underserved communities by eliminating housing and lending discrimination
against persons of color and other vulnerable populations.
Additionally, the action plan highlights activities to eliminate the racial homeownership gap, an
important priority of the Administration as the root of these disparities is often traced to
discriminatory policies and practices at the local, state, and national level, as well as
discrimination in the private sector. HUD took a comprehensive look at the home-ownership life
cycle and determined a broad set of opportunities in which HUD can play a role expanding
homeownership opportunities. The final item in the action plan builds on ongoing efforts
in
HUD's homelessness assistance programs to promote equity in work to end homelessness.
Homelessness affects people of all ages and races across the country, in urban, suburban, and
rural areas, including tribal communities, but barriers can prevent resources from equitably
reaching all those in need. The actions identified in this plan will bring greater equity within
these programs to underserved communities.
This action plan responds to OMB's submission requirements; it is not a full picture of the work
in which HUD staff is engaged to ensure equity throughout HUD's programs, policies, and
practices. For example, a team explored opportunities for meaningful engagement with
stakeholder groups and mechanisms to reduce barriers to regularly benefitting from the expertise
of people with lived experience, which provides a foundation for future activities to bring lived
experiences into HUD's decision-making processes. HUD's FY2022-2026 Strategic Plan
identifies additional undertakings to promote equity, such as improving rental assistance to
P a g e 3
address the need for affordable housing. HUD has embraced the opportunity presented by
Executive Order 13985 to bring equity to the agency's internal and external activities.
P a g e 4
Early Accomplishments
Publication of an interim final rule, Restoring Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
Definitions and Certifications; publication of a proposed rule, Restoring HUD's
Discriminatory Effects Standard, that proposes to restore the 2013 discriminatory effects rule.
Announced that HUD would administer and enforce the Fair Housing Act to prohibit sex
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, consistent with Title VII
and the Supreme Court's decision in Bostock V. Clayton County, 590 U.S.
(2020).
Updated HUD's Language Access Plan in October 2021.
Initiated the Interagency Task Force on Property Appraisal and Valuation Equity (PAVE), co-
chaired by Secretary Fudge.
Entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Federal Housing Finance Agency on
August 12, 2021, to enhance fair housing enforcement.
Mortgagee Letter 2021-12, Eligibility Requirements for Certain Non-Permanent Resident
Borrowers.
Mortgagee Letter 2021-13, Student Loan Payment Calculation of Monthly Obligation.
Mortgagee Letter 2021-27, Appraisal Fair Housing Compliance and Updated General
Appraiser Requirements, to address discrimination in the appraisal process.
Launched a FFB-Risk Sharing Initiative, which will bring much-needed capital to
development of affordable rental housing that serves people and communities long
disadvantaged by racial discrimination.
Launching an innovative housing counseling grant program to expand access to HUD
approved counseling services to HBCU & MSI communities and their constituencies and
facilitate educational and employment opportunities for the next generation of HUD Certified
Housing Counselors.
Included equity in Notices of Funding Opportunities (NOFOs), for example: FY 2020
Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) Competitive Grant and FY2021
CoC Program Competition NOFO.
Provided grantees with resources supporting equity, for example updated a series of
resources to reduce barriers to serving transgender individuals experiencing homelessness.
Initiated Coordinated Entry Equity Initiative pilot to support nine communities in improving
housing outcomes and the human experience for Black, Brown, Indigenous and all people of
color.
Added equity component to research and evaluation, including Regulatory Impact Analyses;
HUD's Program Evaluation Policy; research priorities in PD&R's Unsolicited Proposals for
Research Partnerships; and HUD's Learning Agenda.
Extended procurement small business outreach activities with organizations to reach
underserved communities, including persons with disabilities, LGBTQ+ business owners,
and American Indians.
Began developing a framework to partner between federal agencies and communities, with
potential support from philanthropy, to help local communities increase equity in deployment
of federal funding.
Staff initiatives include formation of a Knowledge Collaborative on Race, Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion in research in PD&R; diversity training for a staff-created Diversity and Office
P a ge 5
Improvements Committee in PIH; and creation of a rotation program in OGC to enable
career staff to spend focused time engaged in moving forward the HUD equity agenda.
P a g e 6
Procurement
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
HUD pursues a range of activities to meet the small business and small disadvantaged business
goals set by the Small Business Administration (SBA). Yet, many entrepreneurs with appropriate
skills and capacity have not successfully gained access to the federal procurement system. As the
interagency community works to address system-wide challenges, HUD is focusing on widening
the base of small businesses based on the socio-economic groups that appear under-represented
in HUD's procurements.
Groups are identified under the Small Business Act as socially disadvantaged for having suffered
the effects of discriminatory practices or similar invidious circumstances over which they have
no control. Executive Order 13985 includes other groups that have experienced discrimination
that may affect their ability to access capital and capture market opportunities. HUD has
considered how its procurement outreach can connect with small, disadvantaged businesses and
other entrepreneurs, such as those who identify as LGBTQ+, are of a religious minority, or have
a disability.
Through the equity assessment process at HUD and other agencies, two sets of barriers have
been identified. On the vendor side is difficulty navigating the complex process of the federal
procurement system and identifying specific agency opportunities. On the agency side is
improving market research and forecasting to match needs with small business capabilities.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
Input from internal and external stakeholders during the equity assessment indicated the need for
more expansive outreach and support to small businesses underrepresented in the procurement
space. HUD's Office of Small Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) seeks to support
greater data analytics; invest in technological improvements including a virtual matchmaking
platform; and develop and implement training to educate small businesses about the federal
procurement process. With more staff, OSDBU will be able to expand outreach efforts to
connect with more community partners, help new businesses navigate the process, and expand
the geographical diversity of HUD's supplier base. HUD's ongoing relationships with local
communities also provide mechanisms to increase the awareness of opportunities and support
development of pathways for small businesses. For example, staff in the Office of Field Policy
and Management will conduct additional local outreach.
External outreach and support activities will be complemented by internal outreach and support
activities. The equity assessment identified areas of communication and peer learning to pursue.
Specific areas of focus are improving the forecasting descriptions to help small businesses
identify appropriate opportunities (and making these forecasts easy for small businesses to
locate) and working with program offices to widen the aperture when conducting market
research. Improved acquisition planning is expected to yield higher quality market research,
facilitate greater understanding of small business participation in the marketplace, and allow
Page 7
more time to disseminate requirements to the small business community so businesses can better
plan and prepare competitive proposals. HUD's Office of the Chief Procurement Officer
(OCPO) will provide best practices to help offices develop requirements to ensure they do not
unintentionally foreclose small business opportunities.
Recognizing the importance of using small, local businesses and creating opportunities for
sustainable entrepreneurship to build and retain individual and community wealth, HUD is in a
unique position in which it can encourage its grantees to work with local small businesses by
sharing effective models from programs as varied as Choice Neighborhoods and CDBG-Disaster
Recovery. HUD directly bolsters employment and economic opportunity for small businesses
and local residents through Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act, which creates
a pathway for Section 3 businesses (owned by or hiring low-income individuals) to develop the
capacity to pursue future federal contracting opportunities. HUD grantees also use HUD funding
to support other small and local businesses to provide their services or products on an array of
federally funded projects. HUD will partner with SBA to encourage entrepreneurship in public
housing and Section 8 (Housing Choice Voucher) housing through community-based classes
targeted to HUD-assisted residents and develop mechanisms to connect Section 3 businesses
with contracting opportunities and federal programs.
Success requires going beyond data on small business contracting to identify what happens to
small businesses after they receive a government contract. HUD will work with the interagency
community to identify supports needed to ensure the sustainability of businesses, provide
appropriate resources as they transition from small to medium businesses, and track success.
Tracking Progress
OSDBU will track attendees at outreach events to identify if expanded efforts are reaching new
businesses and adjust strategies as needed to increase outreach to underrepresented groups. HUD
will continue analyzing procurement data to track the number of small business vendors within
each socio-economic category and dollar amounts of contracts to see if agency efforts are
effective in reducing the identified barriers. With expected government-wide improvements in
data collection, HUD will be able to further refine actions to reach small business owners who
have the needed capabilities but have been unable to connect through the federal procurement
system. As greater data resources become available, HUD will refine its strategies to expand the
universe of small businesses owned by members of underserved communities that obtain access
to HUD's procurement opportunities.
OCPO plans to implement a dashboard to track acquisition actions through their lifecycle to
provide HUD's acquisition workforce with greater visibility into the contracting process. This
will advance equity by tracking small business set-asides and identifying unplanned actions
earlier, to enable OCPO and OSDBU to work with program offices to determine opportunities
for small businesses.
Accountability
Pagel8
The federal small business contracting ecosystem provides several accountability mechanisms
that enable the public to track HUD's progress on these actions. These include the annual SBA
contracting scorecard and HUD's OSDBU's Annual Report. Additionally, HUD's FY2022 -
2026 Strategic Plan includes working with SBA to support Section 3 businesses as they develop
the capacities to compete for federal contracts.
P a g e 9
Fair Housing and Civil Rights Resources
President Biden's memorandum on redressing our nation's history of discriminatory housing
practices and policies recognizes the ongoing legacies of residential segregation and
discrimination and the critical role of the federal government in overcoming this history of
discrimination by enforcing civil rights and fair housing laws. HUD's Office of Fair Housing and
Equal Opportunity (FHEO) is the office focused on advancing civil rights, receiving legal
support from the Office of General Counsel fair housing and regional counsel. FHEO largely has
authority to carry out HUD's responsibilities under the Fair Housing Act through three primary
functions: (1) executing an administrative complaint process; (2) exercising Secretarial authority
to independently commence investigations and bring complaints under the Fair Housing Act and
initiating compliance reviews of recipients of federal financial assistance; and (3) administering
the Fair Housing Act's mandate that all programs and activities related to housing and urban
development Affirmatively Further Fair Housing (AFFH).
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
FHEO funds four programs to support education on and enforcement of civil rights: the Fair
Housing Initiatives Program (FHIP) gives grants to private fair housing organizations; the Fair
Housing Assistance Program (FHAP) supports state and local civil rights enforcement agencies;
the National Fair Housing Training Academy (NFHTA) offers training on fair housing
investigation and conciliation techniques to FHIP and FHAP partners; and the Limited English
Proficiency Initiative (LEPI) provides English translation and interpretation services. Funding
for these programs has failed to increase to meet the need for fair housing enforcement.
Discrimination reports by members of the public to FHEO and FHAP-funded organizations have
trended upward for years and recently saw a sharp increase from 13,590 in FY2017 to 24,200 in
FY2021. The proportion of contacts that triggers FHEO's obligation to file a Fair Housing Act
complaint for investigation remains steady around 17 percent. A five-year record high of 8, ,402
investigations were initiated in FY2021. Meanwhile, the number of FHAP-funded organizations
has significantly dropped from 102 in FY2010 to 76 at the end of FY2020. FHIP-funded
organizations also have decreased from 141 in FY2010 to 120 currently. The decrease means
fewer private local and state organizations are investigating housing discrimination complaints
and enforcing fair housing laws. The planned increase in education and outreach activities along
with implementation of the Bostock decision are likely to result in more filed complaints.
While discrimination has continued, staffing and funding resources have either not kept pace or
declined, creating barriers for HUD in resolving complaints in a timely manner for all parties
involved. In 2003, FHEO had 744 full-time equivalents (FTEs), which fell to 577 FTEs by
FY2010 and reached a low of 435 in FY2019. FHEO regained some capacity with an increase to
534 FTEs in FY2021 but remains well below prior years' staffing levels. The staffing decrease
has challenged HUD's ability to keep pace with both the number of complaints filed by the
public for violations of their rights and the completion of statutorily required fact-finding
investigations.
P a g e 10
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
The President's FY2022 budget request invests in FHEO capacity, proposing a 16.7 percent
increase for FHEO salaries and expenses (S&E) to increase staff to 624 FTE. Having diverse
staff representative of the customer base that experiences housing discrimination, including
people of color and people with disabilities; training in culturally competent communications;
and greater awareness of social services will further advance equity in FHEO service delivery.
Increased S&E funds are needed to keep pace with HUD's obligations to process, investigate and
resolve fair housing complaints and other civil right matters and to improve capacity to pursue
Secretary-initiated investigations and compliance reviews. These do not depend on public filing
of a complaint, often involve complex, systemic fair housing issues, and require extensive FHEO
and OGC staff time. Investing in FHEO capacity will be a continued priority in future budgets.
In addition to enforcement activities, FHEO has issued guidance and new rules to strengthen the
prohibition against discrimination in housing. As stated in the interim final rule on AFFH, HUD
intends to undertake a comprehensive rulemaking to implement the Fair Housing Act's mandate
to Affirmatively Further Fair Housing. The public will be given an opportunity to weigh in on
any revised AFFH rule to ensure underserved communities will benefit from and grantees
understand their obligations under any final regulatory framework.
Additional rulemaking actions HUD plans to undertake to promote equity include: Advanced
Notice of Proposed Rule Making (ANPRM): Nondiscrimination Based on Disability in
Federally-Assisted Programs and Activities of HUD updating regulations under Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act; ANPRM: Adoption of Accessibility Standard to Ensure that Multifamily
Housing Covered by the Fair Housing Act is Accessible to Individuals with Disabilities to seek
public comment on whether HUD should adopt a national accessibility standard for complying
with the Fair Housing Act's design and construction requirements; and Notice of Proposed Rule
Making: Adoption of Updated Accessibility Standard for the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA).
Tracking Progress
HUD will evaluate success by tracking the number of (1) Fair Housing Act complaints received,
processed, and closed, which is provided in FHEO's annual reports; (2) FHIP- and FHAP-funded
organizations working at the state and local level; (3) cases referred by FHIP organizations; (4)
cases processed by FHAP organizations; and (5) FHIP/FHAP practitioners attending NFHTA
trainings. HUD is pursuing tracking measures that will analyze trends in filed fair housing
complaints on a more granular level to reveal causes for trends seen from public filings.
As aggressive measures are administered to increase FTEs, FHEO will use benchmarks and track
its hiring rates. FHEO also will institute measures to increase retention rates. The capacity to
pursue Secretary-initiated complaints, as measured through staffing and resources metrics, is
another important indicator of HUD's ability to address discriminatory activities at a larger level.
For purposes of implementing the AFFH Interim Final Rule, HUD will track the technical
assistance provided to members of the public, HUD funded grantees, and stakeholder
organizations.
P a g e 11
Accountability
HUD's Strategic Plan includes several milestones related to FHEO's activities to empower
individuals and reduce discrimination in the housing market, which will ensure public
accountability. HUD will engage in stakeholder outreach to those with a variety of viewpoints to
ensure its planned activities meet communities' needs.
P a g e
12
Homeownership
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
Homeownership is often a significant component of household wealth, especially for households
of color. Homeownership opportunities influence where and how households live, which in turn
affect access to community investments and amenities. Yet access to homeownership is not
equitable nor is wealth accrual driven by homeownership. In the second quarter of 2019, the
homeownership rates for white, Black, and Latino households were 73.1 percent, 40.6 percent,
and 46.6 percent respectively - the largest differentials in fifty years. Similarly, in 2019, the
median household wealth for white, Black, and Latino households was $189,100, $24,100, and
$36,050
respectively. 1 Other underserved groups face significant barriers to realizing the benefits
of homeownership. Freddie Mac found the homeownership rate of LGBTQ+ households was 49
percent, far lower than the national average of 64 percent. Compounding, intersectional
discrimination is likely for LGBTQ+ households of color; a vast majority of Black LGBTQ+
home seekers in Freddie Mac's study feared housing discrimination based on both their sexual
orientation (70 percent) and their race/ethnicity (89 percent). Furthermore, persons with physical
disabilities face difficulties in finding accessible housing opportunities.
In conducting an equity assessment, the cross-office HUD team looked broadly at the
homeownership lifecycle rather than focusing on a single HUD program. This approach allowed
the team to find multiple opportunities for reducing the racial homeownership gap. In partnership
with HUD's Customer Experience team, staff spoke with Black and Hispanic individuals about
their knowledge, beliefs, and experiences related to credit and purchasing a home. Focus on this
earlier stage in the homebuying process was selected to inform a range of activities, including
asset building efforts, financial empowerment strategies, down payment assistance from a range
of governmental and nonprofit sources, and fair housing and fair lending enforcement and
outreach.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
HUD is working to eliminate the racial homeownership gap through a range of actions and
within many different programs, along with partnerships with federal and non-federal
organizations. These include:
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) activities to maximize homeownership for
creditworthy first-time homebuyers and preserve homeownership for existing homeowners.
These include improving the efficiency of the FHA program by leveraging technologies and
removing perceived bias of the program so individuals, lenders, and others can use it more
with first time, lower income home buyers.
Increased engagement with non-traditional lenders, including community-based institutions,
to better reach underserved communities through Community Planning and Development
(CPD) grant programs like HOME Investment Partnership.
1
Joint Center for Housing Studies (JCHS). The State of the Nation 's Housing: 2021. Joint Center for Housing
Studies, Harvard University, 2021.
P a g e 13
Continued analysis into mechanisms to increase the availability of small-dollar mortgage
loans by addressing the financial and operational barriers limiting origination of these loans.
Office of Native American Programs' Office of Loan Guarantee activities to increase
residential mortgage lending on tribal trust lands, including increased lender outreach and
information modernization.
Efforts to ensure manufactured housing is a thriving source of affordable, quality, durable,
and safe housing for Americans include implementing up-to-date Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards.
Expanding access to financing for affordable housing types like manufactured housing
through updates to the Title I program.
Providing increased support to individuals through culturally responsive and linguistically
competent housing counseling; targeted outreach to historically underserved populations; and
updated tools to enhance the customer experience and improve equitable access to housing
counseling.
Improving asset and credit building for renters interested in transitioning to homeownership.
Implementing actions to reduce bias in home appraisals as identified by PAVE.
Applying knowledge gains from the outreach pilot to individuals on access to credit to
inform program design across relevant program areas.
Proposing a 40-Year Term for Loan Modifications Rule, currently under OMB review, which
will allow mortgagees to provide borrowers in default with a loan modification for up to 480
months to help borrowers reduce monthly mortgage payments and retain their homes.
A sufficient supply of affordable housing across a range of income levels and locations to meet
consumers' needs is a critical component to improving access to homeownership. HUD is
working with federal partners to identify opportunities to support an increase in housing supply.
As a first step, HUD is taking the following actions:
Expanding the exclusive listing period for HUD Real Estate Owned homes from 15 days to
30 to increase the time owner-occupants, HUD-approved nonprofits, and governmental
entities can view and bid on properties without competing with investor purchasers.
Enhancing the Claims Without Conveyance of Title program to provide an exclusive period
for owner-occupants, HUD-approved nonprofits, and governmental entities to bid on
properties prior to conveyance to HUD, reintroducing these affordable properties into the
housing supply more quickly.
Carrying out note sales of vacant properties with a set-aside for mission driven non-profits
that will rehabilitate these properties for affordable homeownership and contribute to
community revitalization.
Tracking Progress
HUD will continue to track a range of indicators that would reflect an increase in sustainable
homeownership by Black and Hispanic households that reduces the racial homeownership gap.
Monitoring includes:
Data on loan borrowers to determine changes in the numbers and percentages of Black and
Hispanic households that access FHA-insured loans and the rest of the mortgage market.
FHA lending activity in underserved markets in relation to other mortgage market
participation in these areas to enhance reporting of potential Black and Hispanic households
P a g e 14
served particularly where demographics of borrowers are not reported. FHA will also
monitor servicer portfolios to assess loss mitigation actions on seriously delinquent (90+
days) mortgages in these communities.
Demographics of borrowers seeking FHA financing who were denied loans that received an
accept from TOTAL Mortgage Scorecard, HUD's system for evaluating a loan applicant's
overall credit worthiness.
Serious default data across racial homeownership profiles.
Accessible housing rates through the American Housing Survey, to determine if the housing
stock is becoming more accessible for homeowners with mobility disabilities.
The Office of Housing Counseling will analyze data from HUD 9902 counseling reports,
campaign analytics, and program performance reviews to evaluate the effectiveness of its
activities to reduce barriers to effective housing counseling services.
Accountability
HUD currently has several mechanisms for accountability, including the Annual Report to
Congress on the financial status of the FHA's Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund, which contains
data on the race of borrowers; and the FY2022-2026 Strategic Plan, which contains specific
performance indicators across programs and is aligned with HUD's overall equity objectives.
P a g e 15
Homelessness
HUD's Point-in-Time count, which counts sheltered and unsheltered people experiencing
homelessness on one night every year, found 580,466 people were living in emergency shelters,
transitional housing programs, or in unsheltered locations on a given night in January 2020.
National aggregate data in 2018 found over 1.44 million people experienced sheltered
homelessness over the course of a year. The pandemic has likely increased housing instability.
Reducing the number of people experiencing homelessness poses a challenge in an environment
in which 7.77 million households earning 50 percent or less of area median income are paying
more than one-half of their income for rent and/or living in severely inadequate conditions.
These households may be one paycheck away from losing their housing. As the Administration
works to increase housing stability for all households, the needs of individuals and families who
currently don't have a safe place to sleep at night continues to be a pressing problem.
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
The experience of homelessness is not limited to one group or geography. Homelessness is
experienced in cities, suburbs, rural areas, and tribal lands; across races and ethnicities; by
individuals and families; young and old; male, female, transgender, and gender non-conforming.
However, some groups are less likely to have safe access to homeless shelters and some
experience homelessness for longer periods. In the 2020 Annual Homeless Assessment Report
(AHAR), people identifying as Black or African American accounted for 39 percent of all people
experiencing homelessness but are 12 percent of the U.S. population. More than one-half of
transgender people experiencing homelessness are unsheltered. Individuals with disabilities
experiencing chronic homelessness compose nearly 25 percent of all individuals experiencing
homelessness. Assessment tools, prioritization processes, and general practices within
coordinated entry systems (CES) were originally established to ensure the most vulnerable
among those experiencing homelessness were not left out. Yet Black people, other people of
color, people with disabilities, and LGBTQ+-identified people continue to have longer periods of
homelessness, longer times to be housed, and higher rates of returns to homelessness.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
HUD's activities build on several years of work within the Office of Special Needs Assistance
Programs (SNAPS) to support greater equity in the provision of homeless assistance. For
example, HUD produced a set of racial equity resources, data toolkits, and research reports to
help communities better understand and address the overrepresentation of people of color among
those experiencing homelessness. Other actions include:
A second cohort of Continuums of Care (CoCs) will work together in the "Coordinated Entry
Equity Demonstration" to design more equitable CES processes on assessment and
prioritization to significantly improve the Homeless Response System experience and
housing stability outcomes for all people of color. Best practices from the demonstration will
be shared with the larger homeless assistance community.
Leverage lessons from the Youth Homelessness Demonstration Program, which required
communities to involve youth in decision making. Best practices on identifying and
P a g e 16
supporting youth to serve as advocates and experts and developing tools informed by young
people with lived experience to address youth homelessness locally will be shared.
Partner with U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH) and other agencies to
reduce entries into homelessness from foster care and criminal justice and other institutions.
Support the USICH in implementing the Federal Strategic Plan to prevent and end
homelessness.
Improve the collection of (1) gender identity data and (2) race and ethnicity data in both what
information is collected and how it is collected through dedicated teams of people with lived
experience, advocacy organizations, researchers, technical assistance providers, and HUD
staff. The goal is to collect data in a culturally sensitive and trauma-informed way and
ensures data are not used to disenfranchise people. Improved data collection will enable
greater awareness of barriers and effective actions.
Support partners to create tailored, equitable solutions for individuals' needs informed by
their lived experiences by building on prior pilot programs that bring people with lived
experience into the decision-making process - both with federal funding decisions and local
program design decisions.
Provide technical assistance and guidance to assist communities in implementing and
improving CES involving client-focused approaches and strategies that center racial equity.
Further implement equity in Notices of Funding Opportunity (NOFO).
Continue to implement Tribal participation in the CoC program pursuant to the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2021, which allows Indian Tribes and Tribally Designated Housing
Entities to participate in the CoC Program. HUD conducted two Tribal Consultation sessions
and presented a webinar for existing CoCs on including Indian Tribes and TDHEs. SNAPS
will begin to offer direct TA assistance to Indian Tribes and TDHEs in 2022. Resources may
address how to overcome data challenges, making coordinated entry processes inclusive of
tribes and culturally responsive; and tribes forming local continuum of care.
Tracking Progress
Improve data collection through efforts to update the Homeless Management Information
System (HMIS) data collection requirements for race, ethnicity, and sexual orientation and
gender identity. This will enable HUD to better track progress in equitably serving people
experiencing homelessness. The data, addressing a range of demographic characteristics, are
published annually in the AHAR to enable ongoing tracking of progress to serve people
experiencing homelessness more equitably. A racial equity analysis tool, developed by a
technical assistance provider, provides data on individual CoCs. It does not capture change over
time but offers a way to understand the population experiencing homelessness and how that
relates to the population overall.
The communities participating in the Coordinated Entry Equity Initiative are implementing
strategies in their prioritization and assessment systems to improve outcomes for people of color.
Over the next twelve months, SNAPS will track progress of the eight communities that
participated in the first Initiative. Each community will report on their exits to permanent
housing, returns to homelessness, first time homeless and racial/ethnic system proportionality.
Accountability
Page 17
The Annual Report to Congress provides one means of accountability. NOFOs and awardees are
publicly available, enabling public review of efforts to increase equity across a range of
underserved communities through grant awards. Regular engagement with grantees and people
experiencing homelessness occurs through bi-weekly office hours, and participation in
conferences and panels provides SNAPS with an opportunity to receive direct feedback.
