Annual Evaluation Plan I
Fiscal Year 2023
OF
Sin
S.
*
AND
IDDR
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development I Office of Policy Development and Research
Annual Evaluation Plan-Fiscal Year 2023
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
March 28, 2022
Contents
Background
1
Requirements of the Evidence Act
1
Policy Framework and HUD's Strategic Plan
2
Significant Evaluation Activities
3
Dissemination Efforts
4
New Significant Evaluation Activities Planned for Fiscal Year 2023
5
Core Housing Programs
5
Public Housing Agency (PHA) Use of COVID-19 Waivers and Effects for PHAs and Tenants
6
Homeownership
6
FHA's Role in Closing the Homeownership Gap and Preserving Homeownership During Economic
Decline
6
Self-Sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
6
Asset Building Demonstration
7
Broadband Access for HUD-assisted Households
7
Vulnerable and Special Populations
8
Emergency Housing Voucher Program Evaluation
8
Eviction Protection Grant Program Evaluation
8
Emergency Rental Assistance Program Evaluation
9
Ongoing Evaluation Activities
9
i
Background
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) administers a diverse array of
programs, including public housing, tribal housing, assisted multifamily housing, and tenant-based rental
assistance; Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgage insurance; the Ginnie Mae guaranty on
mortgage-backed securities; loan guarantees, lead hazard control and healthy homes grants; fair
housing and civil rights investigations, compliance, and enforcement; community development and
housing block grants; homeless assistance grants; and disaster recovery support. From HUD's formation
in 1965, research, statistics, and other evidence have been central in shaping housing and community
development policy nationally.
HUD's Office of Policy Development and Research (PD&R) leads the Department's efforts related to
evidence-based policymaking. PD&R's mission is to provide reliable and objective research on housing
and community development that is relevant for HUD and for its constituents and enables informed
policy decisions. PD&R focuses on finding definitive answers to questions about which programs work,
and how they can be made better, through quick-turnaround studies and long-term evaluations that
systematically assess impacts and outcomes and shed light on paths to improvement. In this way, PD&R
helps drive HUD's evidence-based policymaking, promoting the best possible policies and programs
through accurate data, rigorous research, and sound policy advice. In addition to PD&R, several other
offices maintain evaluation or data analytic functions.
HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement articulates the core principles and practices of the Department's
evaluation and research activities. HUD updated the Evaluation Policy Statement in August 2021,
reaffirming the Department's commitment to conducting rigorous, relevant evaluations and to using
evidence from evaluations to inform policy and practice. The Policy Statement applies to all HUD-
sponsored evaluations and regulatory impact analyses; it also applies to the selection of projects,
contractors, and HUD staff that are involved in evaluations.
Requirements of the Evidence Act
Building on the recommendations of the Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking, in 2019 Congress
passed the bipartisan Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act ("Evidence Act"). 1 The Act and
the Office of Management and Budget's implementing guidelines establish several important new
requirements for federal agencies. 2 Key requirements include developing a Learning Agenda that
identifies the most policy-relevant and timely research questions for an agency to pursue over the next
4 years; a Capacity Assessment for Research, Evaluation, Statistics, and Analysis that assesses the
coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of an agency's evidence-building and
analysis activities for supporting evidence-based policymaking, which is also produced every 4 years;
and Annual Evaluation Plans that communicate significant planned research and evaluation activities for
the coming fiscal year. Exhibit 1 summarizes these documents, which are available on the HUD User
website at: https://www.huduser.gov/portal/about/pdr_learningagenda.html.
1
Public Law 115-435 (132 STAT. 5529). "Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.'
2 The primary implementation guidance is found in Memorandum M-19-23 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
tontent/uploads/2019/07/M-19-23.pdfand Circular A-11 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/a11.pdf#page=776&zoom=100,0,0
1
Exhibit 1. Overview of HUD Evidence Act Deliverables
Deliverable
Description
Published Documents
Learning Agenda
Sets out HUD's foundational learning questions and
Learning Agenda:
priority research questions by policy topic.
Fiscal Years 2022-
Developed with extensive stakeholder input.
2026
Produced every 4 years but revisited annually.
Capacity Assessment
Assesses the coverage, quality, methods,
HUD Capacity
for Research,
effectiveness, and independence of evidence-building
Assessment for
Evaluation, Statistics,
and analysis activities for supporting evidence-based
Research,
and Analysis
policymaking.
Evaluation,
Produced every 4 years.
Statistics, and
Analysis (2022)
Annual Evaluation Plan
Presents the significant evaluation activities that HUD
Annual Evaluation
will begin each fiscal year.
Plan - Fiscal Year
Lists the significant evaluation activities ongoing
2022
during the fiscal year.
FY 2023 Annual
Identifies interim updates to HUD's Learning Agenda
Evaluation Plan -
(if applicable).
Fiscal Year 2023
Produced every year.
Policy Framework and HUD's Strategic Plan
The Evidence Act closely associates Annual Evaluation Plans with each agency's strategic planning
process. Strategic plans include material on evidence building, and the Evidence Act requires Learning
Agendas to align with and support these plans and to reflect knowledge gained through evidence-
building activities. The evidence-building priorities identified in this Annual Evaluation Plan align with
the major Goals identified in the Department's Fiscal Year 2022-2026 Strategic Plan.
The Annual Evaluation Plan also aligns with HUD's Learning Agenda: Fiscal Years 2022-2026, providing a
real-time update on the major evaluation activities the Department is undertaking. To connect the
evaluation activities in the Plan to HUD's programs and mission, the Annual Evaluation Plan adopts the
Policy Topic categories developed for the Learning Agenda, which sorts priority research questions into
11 crosscutting Policy Topic Areas.
Exhibit 2 shows the primary alignment between Policy Topics in HUD's Learning Agenda and Annual
Evaluation Plans and the Department's Strategic Goals. Each policy topic area is inherently flexible
enough to contribute to most, if not all, of the Strategic Goals; however, the exhibit presents a single
primary alignment highlighting where the balance of the research questions under each topic contribute
to departmental goals.
Exhibit 2. Alignment of Policy Topics to HUD's Strategic Goals
Policy Topic
Aligned Strategic Goals
Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Core Housing Programs
Goal 2: Ensure access to and increase the production
of affordable housing
Disaster Recovery, Energy, and Climate Change
Goal 4: Advance sustainable communities
2
Policy Topic
Aligned Strategic Goals
Fair Housing
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Homeownership
Goal 3: Promote homeownership
Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
Goal 2: Ensure access to and increase the production
of affordable housing
Housing and Health
Goal 4: Advance sustainable communities
Indian and Tribal Issues
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Self-sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Vulnerable and Special Populations
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Enhanced Data and Methods
Goal 5: Strengthen HUD's internal capacity
Significant Evaluation Activities
The evaluation activities in the FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan (AEP) are a mix of long-running priorities,
efforts to continue learning from existing projects, and opportunities to study new departmental
initiatives. The AEP does not capture every way HUD builds or uses evidence in support of its mission.
Instead, the AEP focuses on significant evaluation activities, defined as activities that meet the following
criteria for topical relevance, coordination, and commitment of resources:
Topical Relevance-Significant evaluation activities address pressing questions and shed insights
into important issues for the department. These projects investigate unaddressed research
questions in the Learning Agenda or seek to respond thoughtfully and nimbly to emerging
challenges and priorities of policymakers.
Coordination-Significant evaluation activities require substantial advance planning and
cooperation. These projects leverage expertise, require buy-in across offices, and benefit a HUD
program or an overarching element of HUD's mission.
Commitment of Resources-Significant evaluation activities require investment. These projects
have secured funding through prior-year congressional appropriations or are being conducted
using dedicated in-house staff resources and expertise.
The work to expand the knowledge base around policy topic areas critical to HUD's mission includes a
substantial number of activities that would not be classified as "evaluations." Per section 101(a) of the
Evidence Act, "The term 'evaluation' means an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis
of one or more programs, policies, and organizations intended to assess their effectiveness and
efficiency. 113 This definition clarifies that activities critical to the everyday work of PD&R and the
department as a whole-such as data collection, modeling, monitoring efforts, exploratory research,
and producing guidance and technical assistance-are not included in the AEP. Those efforts can and do
contribute to significant evaluation activities and are discussed in more detail in other documents, such
as HUD's annual Agency Performance Plans and Reports.4
3 5 U.S.C. ยง 311(3); ; https://www.govregs.com/uscode/title5 parti chapter3 subchapterll section311
4 https://www.hud.gov/program offices/spm/appr.
3
Dissemination Efforts
Major evaluations offer an important opportunity for HUD to share best practices, translate complex
findings, and ensure that stakeholders have access to actionable information. Each evaluation typically
includes both broad and targeted dissemination strategies based on the nature of the findings and the
stakeholders involved. The core of HUD's approach to disseminating evidence is huduser.gov, the
Department's research and communication platform operated by PD&R. The site is updated regularly
with reports, briefs, and data releases associated with all major evaluation activities. PD&R stakeholders
have access to more than 10,000 research reports, articles, books, and data sources; during FY 2021,
customers downloaded an average of more than 827,000 files per month from the huduser.gov research
portal. For evaluations covering pressing issues or with significant findings, PD&R's Assistant Secretary
will often draft a foreword emphasizing the importance of the work to the Department's and
Administration's priorities. In addition to posting findings and datasets, PD&R posts the research designs
(hypotheses, outcome measures, and analysis methods) for major evaluations on huduser.gov at the
outset of these projects, providing greater transparency to HUD's evaluation work.
Beyond products associated with a specific evaluation, PD&R produces several periodicals that often
draw from recently completed research and help ensure that the findings reach different audiences:
The Edge- - The Edge is PD&R's biweekly online magazine, providing news, a message from PD&R
leadership, and a wide range of information about housing and community development issues,
research, and best practices.
Evidence Matters-Evidence Matters connects policymakers, researchers, advocates, and industry
members with clear, accessible, and timely information on important housing and community
development topics. Since it was first published in 2011, Evidence Matters has been published 23 times,
and the subscriber base is more than 25,000 in addition to those who read it online.
ityscape-Cityscape is a multidisciplinary scholarly journal that PD&R publishes three times a year to
advance the state of knowledge, policy, and practice in the areas of HUD's mission. Each issue includes
at least one symposium of scholarly papers on a common theme. Each symposium has a guest editor.
4
New Significant Evaluation Activities Planned for Fiscal Year 2023
This section briefly describes seven new significant evaluation activities planned for FY 2023. The new
evaluation activities for FY 2023 fall under four policy topic areas covered by the Learning Agenda: Fiscal
Years 2022-2026 and support three of the five Strategic Goals in the Department's Fiscal Year 2022-
2026 Strategic Plan. 5 Exhibit 3 lists the evaluation activities by policy topic area and related strategic
goal. 6
Exhibit 3. Policy Topic Areas and Strategic Goals Addressed by FY 2023 New Evaluation Activities
FY 2023 New Evaluation Activity
Policy Topic
HUD Strategic Goal
1.
PHA Use of COVID-19 Waivers and
Core Housing Programs
Ensure access to and increase
Effects for PHAs and Tenants
the production of affordable
housing (Goal 2)
2.
HUD's Role in Closing the
Homeownership
Promote homeownership
Homeownership Gap
(Goal 3)
3.
Asset Building Demonstration
Self-sufficiency and Economic
Support underserved
4.
Broadband Access for HUD-assisted
Opportunity
communities (Goal 1)
Households
5. Emergency Housing Voucher Evaluation
Vulnerable and Special
Support underserved
6.
Eviction Protection Grant Program
Populations
communities (Goal 1)
Evaluation
7.
Emergency Rental Assistance Program
Evaluation
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease 2019. FHA = Federal Housing Administration. PHA = public housing agency.
Following are brief descriptions of each planned evaluation activity, organized by policy topic area. The
questions to be answered by the seven planned evaluation activities largely align with research
questions in the Learning Agenda but in some cases have been modified to reflect further input from
PD&R researchers and stakeholders across the Department. At the writing of this report, the specifics of
the data and methods to be used for each evaluation activity are actively under discussion. The
descriptions provide guideposts for how the evaluation will likely be conducted, but the approach is
subject to change as HUD's methodologists and subject matter experts work on refining the approaches
and as HUD receives further input from Congress and other stakeholders.
Core Housing Programs
The evaluation activities presented under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 2: Ensure
access to and increase production of affordable housing, by which HUD seeks to increase the supply of
5 The new evaluation activities planned for a given year are not expected to cover all policy topic areas or address all Strategic
Objectives, as those topic areas and objectives may be addressed through ongoing evaluation or through research or capacity-
building activities.
6 HUD's present Strategic Goals display variations in scope, specificity, and time sensitivity, and HUD may not use evaluation
resources to address each objective in any given year. Likewise, the evaluation planned for a given year may not cover all 11
policy topic areas. For some priorities, evaluations can help to answer pressing policy questions or assess established programs.
For other priorities, a more appropriate approach may be to build data systems, conduct exploratory research, or focus on
management or regulatory processes so that significant evaluations can take place in the future.
5
housing and improve rental assistance in order to ensure that housing demand is matched by adequate
production of new homes and equitable access to housing opportunities for all people.
Public Housing Agency (PHA) Use of COVID-19 Waivers and Effects for PHAs and Tenants
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, HUD has used authorities in the CARES Act to provide a series
of statutory and regulatory waivers for the public housing and Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) programs
to help maintain service and limit unnecessary burdens on staff and assisted tenants. This study would
investigate PHAs' use of waivers through surveys, interviews, and document review. This study will help
assess the value of those waivers as potential permanent changes to program operations and potentially
inform future rulemakings and legislative proposals.
Question to be Answered
Which statutory and regulatory waivers instituted during the pandemic did
PHAs find most valuable and why?
Information Needed
Information from PHAs on their use of waivers, collected via surveys,
interviews, or a combination of both
Methods to be Used
Quantitative analysis of survey results and HUD administrative data; qualitative
analysis of interview responses and document review
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov; potential inclusion in PD&R publications
Homeownership
The evaluation activities presented under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 3: Promote
homeownership, by which HUD seeks to promote homeownership opportunities, equitable access to
credit for purchase and improvements, and wealth-building in underserved communities.
FHA's Role in Closing the Homeownership Gap and Preserving Homeownership During Economic Decline
For this effort, we would issue a notice to solicit proposals to study (1) the legacy of redlining for
homeownership patterns and loan performance, using FHA data and U.S. Census Bureau microdata
geocoded to historical Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC) maps; (2) the role that FHA policies play
in reducing the homeownership gap and in creating sustainable homeownership experiences for
African-American and Hispanic homebuyers; and/or (3) the role that FHA mortgage servicing and
forbearance policies have played in preserving homeownership for people of color, including during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Questions to be Answered
What have HUD programs done to close the homeownership gap, and what
role does homeowner equity play?
Information Needed
HUD administrative data; publicly available economic data
Methods to be Used
Quantitative analysis of loan performance data, surveys, and GIS data;
qualitative analysis of interviews
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov; potential inclusion in PD&R publications
Self-Sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
The evaluation activities presented under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic
Strategic Goal 1: Support underserved communities, by which HUD seeks to fortify support for
underserved communities by advancing housing justice, strengthening implementation of a Housing
6
First approach to reducing homelessness, and promoting equitable community development that
generates wealth-building for underserved communities.
Asset Building Demonstration
In contrast to a subsidy intended to maintain minimum levels of consumption, an effective asset-
building program could help very low-income families build assets, such as emergency savings, longer-
term savings and investments, homeownership, and job skills. HUD is interested in building evidence on
how asset-building can complement its housing assistance programs. A rigorous study of the Family Self-
Sufficiency (FSS) program-a component of which focuses on building an escrow account-shows that
after 3 years in the 5-year program, participants had improved their financial literacy and confidence but
had not increased income or employment outcomes. In terms of credit building, a simulation study
suggests that including rent payments in credit-scoring algorithms could improve credit for many HUD-
assisted households. HUD intends to use the Moving to Work (MTW) expansion to investigate the
feasibility and potential impacts of PHA-led asset-building programs designed to promote savings or
build credit.
Questions to be Answered
What additional approaches can encourage asset building among HUD-assisted
households?
Information Needed
HUD administrative data; direct survey data collection
Methods to be Used
Quantitative and qualitative analysis (the specific methods and whether and
how the study will measure program impacts are to be determined)
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov; potential inclusion in PD&R publications
Broadband Access for HUD-assisted Households7
High-bandwidth Internet access is increasingly a prerequisite for education, employment, and self-
sufficiency. This study would assess the "Internet readiness" of the assisted housing stock (housing
choice voucher, public housing, and multifamily section 8), considering the availability of Internet
connections, Internet capacity/bandwidth, the cost to households of Internet access, the availability of
Internet-ready devices, and other barriers to Internet readiness including whether barriers to use by
assisted families differ for protected classes. The study would also assess potential methods for funding
Internet access for assisted households (e.g., direct payments to property owners, increase in the utility
allowance), including estimates of the costs of implementing different approaches.
Question to be Answered
What is the best way to ensure access to high-speed Internet connectivity for
HUD-assisted tenants?
Information Needed
Qualitative data collection; cost data collection
Methods to be Used
Cost-benefit analysis
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov; potential inclusion in PD&R publications
7 HUD expects to launch this study in FY 2022. The study was not included in HUD's FY 2022 AEP because, at the time of writing
that report, the study was expected to begin in FY 2023.
7
Vulnerable and Special Populations
The evaluation activities presented under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 1: Support
underserved communities, by which HUD seeks to fortify support for underserved communities by
advancing housing justice, strengthening implementation of a Housing First approach to reducing
homelessness, and promoting equitable community development that generates wealth-building for
underserved communities.
Emergency Housing Voucher Program Evaluation
The American Rescue Plan provided funding for about 70,000 Emergency Housing Vouchers (EHVs) for
individuals and families who are homeless; at risk of homelessness; fleeing or attempting to flee
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking; or recently homeless
and for whom providing rental assistance will prevent the family's homelessness or having high risk of
housing instability. This mixed-methods evaluation will document (1) how PHAs and Continuums of Care
(CoCs) structured and implemented the EHV program to serve the target populations; (2) which
households (by location, race/ethnicity, homeless status, etc.) accessed and were served by the EHV
program and which households were not; and (3) short-term outcomes (e.g., length of tenure,
neighborhood and housing type) for households that successfully leased up with an EHV. This research
would help HUD understand the relationships between the almost 700 PHAs nationwide administering
the vouchers and the Continuums of Care (CoCs); it would also document how communities used the
substantial administrative fees and the set of alternative requirements and waivers designed to reduce
the barriers often faced by the target population when attempting to lease a housing unit using a
voucher.
Questions to be Answered
How did PHAs and CoCs partner to administer their allocation of EHVs, and
what were the outcomes of tenants who leased up with an EHV?
Information Needed
Program data; key informant interviews
Methods to be Used
Quantitative and qualitative assessment of program data; qualitative interviews
with grantees and partners
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov potential inclusion in PD&R publications
Eviction Protection Grant Program Evaluation
In FY 2021, HUD received $20 million to fund legal services for low-income tenants at risk of eviction.
The Eviction Protection Grant Program, the first of its kind for the Department, was launched by HUD's
Office of Policy Development and Research in the fall of 2021. Ten nonprofit legal aid providers received
inaugural awards ranging from $1 million to $2.4 million through a competitive grant process with a 2-
year period of performance expected to begin January 2022. This evaluation will assess the
implementation of the program and further explore how legal services and housing services can work
together to help tenants avoid eviction altogether or avoid the most harmful effects of eviction.
Questions to be Answered
How are HUD grantees implementing the Eviction Protection Grant Program?
did grantees work with housing providers, legal service providers, and other
social service providers to deliver assistance?
Information Needed
Program data; key informant interviews
8
Methods to be Used
Quantitative and qualitative assessment of program data; qualitative interviews
with grantees and partners
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov; potential inclusion in PD&R publications
Emergency Rental Assistance Program Evaluation
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, Congress has appropriated billions of dollars to federal
government agencies to help people subject to catastrophic income loss maintain their housing and
avoid eviction and homelessness. The Department of the Treasury's Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA)
program has allocated a total of $46.5 billion over two rounds of funding to cities, counties, states, and
tribes to help keep people in their homes. PD&R plans to conduct research into the uses of ERA funds
and their effectiveness in helping households avoid eviction and homelessness and maintain housing
stability. Potential components of the research include (1) a national analysis of the uses of ERA-
answering questions such as how quickly communities were able to help families in need, how their
programs were designed, what activities they chose to fund, and what barriers they faced to using the
funds or reaching certain populations; (2) studies of ERA implementation in diverse local communities to
learn about approaches that were perceived to be most effective in terms of eviction and homelessness
prevention and lessons learned for future investment in emergency assistance; and (3) outcome, impact,
and cost study to evaluate the effectiveness of different models, using metrics such as the rate at which
assisted families subsequently experience eviction or homelessness or the racial and demographic
characteristics of those able to access assistance. The goal of the research would be to contribute
substantially to the evidence base on the role of short-term assistance in promoting long-term housing
stability and to lay the groundwork for a national demonstration of the most promising models.
Question to be Answered
To what extent and how can emergency rental assistance prevent evictions,
deep housing insecurity, and homelessness?
Information Needed
Local/federal administrative data; survey or interviews with local implementers
of the program; surveys or interviews with program beneficiaries (if feasible)
Methods to be Used
Quantitative analysis of administrative data; quantitative analysis of survey
data; qualitative analysis of interview data
Plans for Dissemination
Publication on huduser.gov; potential inclusion in PD&R publications
Ongoing Evaluation Activities
The full body of evaluation work enables Congress, the Secretary, and other HUD principal staff to make
informed decisions on budget and legislative proposals and strengthen housing and community
development policy. Exhibit 4 lists significant PD&R evaluation activities that were launched before
FY 2023 but are expected to contribute to the Department's learning during this period.
PD&R maintains a list of major research and evaluation efforts that are ongoing, as well as a library of
published reports, periodicals, and other evaluation resources on the office's website, huduser.gov.
PD&R's major ongoing evaluation efforts will provide reliable and objective housing research and market
data to the policymaking community, as well as skilled analysis that assists HUD's leadership in making
evidence-based policy decisions.
9
Exhibit 4. Policy Topic Areas and Strategic Objectives Addressed by Ongoing Evaluation Activities
Ongoing Evaluation Activity
Policy Topic Area
HUD Strategic Goal
1.
Choice Neighborhoods Evaluation
Community Development
Support underserved
2.
Use and Effectiveness of CDBG in Local
and Place-based Initiatives
communities (Goal 1)
Jurisdictions
3. Evaluation of Moving to Work (MTW)
Core Housing Programs
Ensure access to and
Understanding the Effects of MTW Flexibility for
increase the production
Small Public Housing Agencies Cohort
of affordable housing
4.
Evaluation of MTW Stepped and Tiered Rent
(Goal 2)
Cohort
5.
Evaluation of MTW Incentives for Landlords
Cohort
6.
Evaluation of the Housing Choice Voucher
Mobility Demonstration
7.
Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD) Choice
Mobility and Long-Term Affordability Evaluation
8.
Rent Reform Demonstration
9. Capital Needs Assessment for Public Housing
10. Impact of RAD on Children in Assisted
Households
11. Voucher Success Rate Study
12. Effectiveness of Disaster Recovery Funding
Disaster Recovery, Energy,
Advance sustainable
and Climate Change
communities (Goal 4)
13. Strategies for Reducing the Regulatory
Housing Finance and
Ensure access to and
Impediments to the Financing and Siting of
Affordable Housing Supply
increase the production
Factory Built Housing in American Communities
of affordable housing
14. Using Parcel and Household Data to Evaluate the
(Goal 2)
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit and Housing
Choice Voucher Programs: Transportation, Crime,
Education, and Tenant Choice
15. Evaluation of the Supportive Services
Housing and Health
Advance sustainable
Demonstration Phase -Integrated Wellness In
communities (Goal 4)
Supportive Housing (IWISH2)
16. Housing and Children's Healthy Development
17. Moving to Opportunity: Platform to Improve
Health
18. Rental Property Health and Safety Violations
19. The First-Time Homebuyer Education and
Homeownership
Promote
Counseling Demonstration
homeownership (Goal
20. Balancing Mortgage Debt Burden and Equity
3)
Accumulation
21. Evaluation of the Family Unification Program and
Self-sufficiency and
Support underserved
Family Self-Sufficiency Demonstration
Economic Opportunity
communities (Goal 1)
22. National Family Self-Sufficiency Program
Demonstration
23. The Foster Youth to Independence Initiative
Implementation Analysis
24. High-Cost Cities, Gentrification, and Voucher Use:
Exploring Access to Quality Homes and
Neighborhoods
10
Ongoing Evaluation Activity
Policy Topic Area
HUD Strategic Goal
25. Evaluation of Tacoma Housing Authority's College
Housing Assistance Program
26. Study of Work Requirement Policies Established
by MTW Agencies
27. Childcare in Assisted Housing
28. Leveraging Integrated Data to Examine Youth
Vulnerable and Special
Support underserved
Homelessness
Populations
communities (Goal 1)
29. Evaluation of the HUD-DOJ Pay for Success
Permanent Supportive Housing Demonstration
30. Coming Home: An Evaluation of New York City
Housing Authority (NYCHA)'s Family Reentry Pilot
31. Housing Outcomes, Tenant Satisfaction, and
Community Integration in Single-site and
Scattered-site Housing First Models: A
Randomized Trial
32. Youth Homeless Prevention Demonstration
Evaluation
33. Family Options: Long-term Tracking
11
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Policy Development and Research
Washington, DC 20410-6000
OFF
un the *
May 2022
EQUAL HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY
