U.S. GOVERNMENT
INFORMATION
GPO
44738
Federal Register/ 86, No. 154/Friday, August 13, 2021/ Notices
Assess the extent to which access to
disparities residing in communities
Added questions to capture details
health care was enhanced for
targeted by funded interventions.
on the intervention and the referrals to
population groups and individuals
Assess the process of adopting and
the record management section
vulnerable to behavioral health
implementing the SPF with the target
(completed by grantee staff).
populations.
TABLE 1-ESTIMATES OF ANNUALIZED HOUR BURDEN
Number of
Responses
Total
Hours per
Total burden
Type of respondent activity
respondents
per
respondent
responses
response
hours
Quarterly Progress Report
197
4
732
4
2,928
Adult questionnaire
10,000
2
20,000
.20
4,000
Youth questionnaire
2,500
2
5,000
.20
1000
Total
12,697
25,732
7,928
Send comments to Carlos Graham,
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
the expert panels and review the quality
SAMHSA Reports Clearance Officer,
of program evaluations.
5600 Fishers Lane, Room 15E57-A,
I. Background
On December 6, 2016 (81 FR 87949),
Rockville, Maryland 20857, OR email a
Evaluation activity occurs in several
HUD issued a policy statement in the
copy to carlos.graham@samhsa.hhs.gov.
offices at HUD, but the special mission
Federal Register 2 responding to the
Written comments should be received
of HUD's Office of Policy Development
GAO report by setting out the core
by October 12, 2021.
and Research (PD&R) is to inform HUD
principles and practices of PD&R's
policy development and
evaluation and research activities. This
Carlos Graham,
implementation to improve life in
statement incorporated some language
Clearance Officer.
American communities through
from a policy statement by the Office of
[FR Doc. 2021-17290 Filed 8-12-21; 8:45 am]
conducting, supporting, and sharing
Policy, Research, and Evaluation of the
BILLING CODE 4162-20-P
research, surveys, demonstrations,
Administration for Children and
program evaluations, and best practices.
Families of the U.S. Department of
Within HUD, PD&R is responsible for
Health and Human Services.
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
most, but not all, program evaluations.
On January 14, 2019, the Foundations
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
The office provides reliable and
for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018 ("Evidence Act"), Public Law 115-
[Docket No. FR-6278-N-01]
objective data and analysis to help
inform policy decisions.
435, was enacted. Section 101 of the
Evidence Act created 5 U.S.C. 311-315
HUD Program Evaluation Policy-
In July 2016, GAO issued a report
and mandated that the head of each
Policy Statement
entitled "Department of Housing and
Urban Development: Actions Needed to
agency appoint an Evaluation Officer,
AGENCY: Office of Policy Development
Incorporate Key Practices into
including at HUD. This officer must
and Research, HUD.
establish common standards for all HUD
Management Functions and Program
ACTION: Notice.
Oversight," (GAO 16-497) in which
evaluations, whether performed by
PD&R or another office. This issuance
GAO presented a broad assessment of
SUMMARY: This policy statement
HUD's management of its operations
articulates department-wide evaluation
articulates the core principles and
standards and states other new
and programs. In the report, GAO
practices of the Department of Housing
examined HUD efforts to: (1) Meet
principles based on PD&R's experience
and Urban Development's evaluation
Federal requirements and implement
since the November 2016 publication.
and research activities. This policy
key practices for management functions,
II. HUD Program Evaluation Policy
reaffirms HUD's commitment to
including performance planning and
conducting rigorous, relevant
Section 101 of the Evidence Act
reporting and human capital, financial,
evaluations and to using evidence from
defines "evaluation" to mean "an
acquisition, and information technology
evaluations to inform policy and
assessment using systematic data
(IT) management; and (2) oversee and
practice.
collection and analysis of one or more
evaluate programs.
programs, policies, and organizations
DATES: August 13, 2021.
PD&R is the primary office within
intended to assess their effectiveness
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For
HUD responsible for data analysis,
and efficiency."
information about this notice, contact
research, program evaluations, and
HUD has identified the following core
Todd M. Richardson, Evaluation Officer,
policy studies that inform the
principles and practices as fundamental
Office of Policy Development and
development and implementation of
to ensuring high-quality and consistent
Research, U.S. Department of Housing
programs and policies across HUD
evaluation results: Rigor, relevance,
and Urban Development, 451 7th Street
offices. PD&R undertakes program
transparency, independence, ethics, and
SW, Washington, DC 20410, telephone
evaluations, often by using a process
technical innovation. This policy
(202) 402-5922. The listed telephone
that includes convening expert panels.
applies to all HUD-sponsored
number is not a toll-free number.
However, GAO found that PD&R had
Persons with hearing- or speech-
neither developed agency-wide, written
2 https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2016-29215.
impairments may access this number
policies for its program evaluations, nor
3
https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ43.
through TTY by calling Federal Relay
documented the criteria used to select
LAW-115publ435.pdf. See also thewebsite, at
https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress
Service at 1-800-877-8339 (this is a
house-bill/4174, on the bill, H.R. 4174 of the 115th
toll-free number).
1 See http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/678551.pdf.
Congress, that became the Act.
Federal Register/ 86, No. 154/Friday, August 13, 2021 / Notices
44739
evaluations and regulatory impact
feasible, HUD uses the most rigorous
special attention to race, national origin,
analyses; they also apply to the
approach that is feasible.
color, familial status, religion, disability,
selection of projects, contractors, and
In both quantitative and qualitative
age, and sex (including gender identity
HUD staff that are involved in
research, rigor means having clear
and sexual orientation).
evaluations.
research questions and an explicit
To support this goal, insofar as
analytic framework; justification for
feasible, HUD collects and reports data
Rigor
case selection and sampling methods in
on race, ethnicity, gender, and income,
HUD is committed to using the most
relation to research goals; and
and other characteristics of
rigorous methods that are appropriate to
transparent, verifiable methods of
underrepresented and underserved
the evaluation questions and feasible
systematic data collection and analysis,
communities relevant for research and
within budget and other constraints.
auditable records, and attention to
analysis efforts.
The need for rigor is not restricted to
possible alternative interpretations
HUD also encourages research to
impact evaluations; rigor is also
during analysis and writing.
engage studied populations.
necessary in implementation or process
HUD ensures that contractors and
"Engagement" means the deliberate and
evaluations, descriptive studies,
grantees conducting evaluations have
intentional inclusion of the thoughts
outcome evaluations, and formative
appropriate expertise through
and perspectives of studied groups,
evaluations; in both qualitative and
emphasizing the requirement for rigor in
such as program participants, grantees,
quantitative approaches. Rigor requires
requests for proposals and funding
and underrepresented and underserved
ensuring that inferences about cause
opportunity announcements, noting that
populations. This includes collecting
and effect are well founded (internal
applicants' capacity for rigor will be
people's thoughts and perspectives
validity); requires clarity about the
evaluated in the selection process. In
through standard (valid and rigorous)
populations, settings, or circumstances
addition, HUD will judge research teams
research methods such as surveys, focus
to which results can be generalized
with equal capacity for rigor to be more
groups, in-depth interviews, or
(external validity); requires that
qualified if the team includes
ethnography to produce published
researchers seek to understand and
researchers demographically similar to
research that conveys studied
correct for implicit bias in the
or knowledgeable about the perspectives
populations' thoughts and perspectives.
formulation of research questions and
and lived experiences of the
In another type of engagement, people
methods; and requires the use of
populations studied.
influence the research that is about
measures that accurately capture the
HUD employs a strategic human
them. This includes a wide range of
intended information (measurement
capital development plan to hire, train,
activities that lie on a continuum from
reliability and validity). Implicit biases
and retain a workforce that ensures staff
simple input (which should be
are discriminatory biases that reflect
have the tools and resources to
documented and published) to full co-
unidentified traces of past experience,
accomplish the mission.
creation of any aspect of the research,
including implicit attitudes that affect
Relevance
from topic selection to research design,
feelings, thoughts or actions, and
data collection, data analysis,
implicit stereotypes that affect how
The HUD evaluation agenda reflects
interpretation, writing, or
others are characterized. Survey
the legislative requirements and policy
dissemination, or even being on the
instruments are pre-tested with
issues related to HUD's mission. HUD
research team. An example of simple
members of the population to be studied
solicits input from stakeholders, both
input is to include in the final report a
to increase measurement validity. When
internal and external, including
summary of comments on the research
statistically appropriate, and
stakeholders with lived experience,
by members of studied groups.
particularly if the number of hypotheses
such as program participants, and
Examples of collaboration include, but
being tested is large, HUD will require
grantees, on the selection of programs to
are not limited to, co-creating the list of
the use of commonly accepted
be evaluated, initiatives,
topics to be covered in a survey or
adjustments to classical statistical
demonstrations, and research questions.
having members of a studied group on
testing to reduce the probability that
For new initiatives and demonstrations
the research team.
random outliers are presented as
in particular, evaluations will be more
To raise awareness of and spur
meaningful.
feasible and useful when planned in
creative approaches to engagement of
In assessing the effects of programs or
advance, in concert with the
studied populations in program
services, HUD evaluations use methods
development of the initiative or
evaluations and HUD-sponsored
that isolate to the greatest extent
demonstration, rather than as an
research, HUD may require contractors
possible the impacts of the programs or
afterthought. HUD strives to understand
and grantees to explain how their
services from other influences, such as
the relevance of its completed research
research will and will not engage
trends over time, geographic variation,
through concerted stakeholder
studied populations. HUD recognizes
or pre-existing differences between
engagement, including with people and
that engagement must be tailored to
participants and non-participants.
grantees affected by HUD programs, to
particular research efforts.
Where feasible, research should employ
continuously improve its research
HUD retains the right to determine
a treatment group and a counterfactual.
agenda.
research methods.
A treatment group is a population that
Expert panels include research and
HUD disseminates findings in ways
has received an intervention. A
other subject matter experts and are
that are accessible and useful to
counterfactual is a population that did
diverse in ways tailored to the study,
policymakers, practitioners, and
not receive the intervention and can
including racial and ethnic diversity
members of communities affected by
credibly represent what would have
and representatives of the studied
HUD programs and policies. Published
happened to the treatment group in the
populations.
findings will be accessible to
absence of the intervention according to
HUD strives to design program
individuals with disabilities pursuant to
the above standard for rigor. For such
evaluations and other analyses to better
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act.
causal questions, experimental
understand structural racism and to
PD&R partners with other HUD program
approaches are preferred. When
reveal unequal benefits and harms
offices to inform internal and external
experimental approaches are not
across social groups as relevant, with
stakeholders through disseminating
44740
Federal Register/ 86, No. 154/Friday, August 13, 2021 / Notices
evidence from HUD-sponsored
HUD evaluation contracts will
Technical Innovation
evaluations.
generally permit contractors to publish
their findings within 6 months of the
PD&R supports and employs new
Transparency
termination of the contract if HUD has
methods of data collection and analysis
HUD will release methodologically
not already published them.
that more reliably and efficiently answer
valid evaluations without regard to the
research questions than old methods do.
findings. Evaluation reports must
Independence
describe the methods used, including
Independence and objectivity are core
Application of These Principles to
strengths and weaknesses, and discuss
principles of evaluation. Agency and
Economic Analysis of Regulations
the generalizability of the findings.
program leadership, program staff,
Economic analysis of both existing
Evaluation reports must present
service providers, and others participate
and proposed regulations, properly
comprehensive results, including
actively in setting evaluation priorities,
conducted, is a critical tool in
favorable, unfavorable, and null
identifying evaluation questions, and
findings. HUD will publish interim
assessing the implications of findings.
improving public policy. Economists at
findings, as projected in the initial
However, it is important to insulate
HUD rely on the insights, data, and
research design. If there are indications
evaluation functions from undue
empirical estimates from rigorous
that the findings of the final report may
influence and from both the appearance
program evaluations when predicting
differ, HUD will provide appropriate
and the reality of bias. To promote
the economic impact of an incremental
qualifications accompanying the
objectivity, HUD protects independence
change to the program. In any HUD
publication to guard against
in the design, conduct, and analysis of
Regulatory Impact Analysis:
misunderstanding or misuse of the
evaluations. To this end:
HUD analyzes whether the issues
interim findings. If there are interim
HUD conducts evaluations through
addressed by the regulation stem from a
findings, HUD will publish those
the competitive award of grants and
market failure, government failure, or
findings even if there are indications
contracts to external experts who are
other systemic problem, and whether
that the findings of the final report may
free from conflicts of interest.
the regulation addresses the root causes
differ. When findings are highly
HUD also conducts evaluations in-
of those problems.
relevant to current policy, HUD
house and supports unsolicited external
evaluations carry a foreword articulating
evaluation proposals with funding, data,
HUD uses and as necessary
the policy position of the Department
or both.
produces the best objective estimates of
with respect to those findings.
The Evaluation Officer will consult
the benefits, costs, and transfers
If the findings of a HUD evaluation
with the HUD office with lead
resulting from the regulation, taking into
will have broad public interest and
responsibility on the design of
account gaps and uncertainties in the
includes a counterfactual, PD&R will
evaluation projects and analysis plans
available data and methodologies.
publish a synopsis of the research
and will advise that office on whether
HUD assesses the economic
design, data collection and analysis plan
to publish evaluation reports.
benefits, costs, and transfers of proposed
soon after it is approved and will
Ethics
regulatory actions as required by
require interim and final reports that
deviate from that document to explain
HUD-sponsored evaluations must be
Executive Order 12866.7 HUD provides
conducted in an ethical manner and
additional analysis of impacts across
how they deviate and why.
HUD publishes a 5-year Learning
safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and
groups defined by race, ethnicity, and
Agenda 4 that outlines the research and
privacy of participants. HUD-sponsored
other characteristics that may define
evaluation that it believes would be of
evaluations must comply with both the
underrepresented and underserved
spirit and the letter of relevant
groups when such analyses are relevant
greatest value to public policy. PD&R
requirements such as regulations
and feasible.
lists all ongoing evaluation projects at
the HUDUSER.gov website 5 and
governing research involving human
Where clear alternatives to the
updates it quarterly. PD&R will release
subjects. In particular, PD&R protects
regulatory actions exist, HUD
evaluation results timely, usually within
the privacy of HUD-assisted households
objectively estimates the benefits, costs,
4 months of receiving the final report.
and HUD-insured borrowers through its
and transfers of those alternatives, and
HUD will, where possible, archive
Rule of Eleven; that is, PD&R allows no
additional analysis of impacts of those
administrative and evaluation data for
disclosure of information about the
alternatives across underrepresented or
secondary use by interested researchers.
characteristics of any group of
underserved groups as well.
HUD typically builds requirements into
individuals or households numbering
contracts to prepare data sets for
fewer than eleven by PD&R staff,
Todd M. Richardson,
secondary use. Access for external
contractors, grantees, or licensees.
Evaluation Officer.
researchers may be provided directly
HUD is a signatory to the Federal
[FR Doc. 2021-17339 Filed 8-12-21; 8:45 am]
through data licenses or indirectly
Policy for the Protection of Human
BILLING CODE 4210-67-P
through inter-agency agreements. This
Subjects, generally known as the
policy may not apply for data that has
"Common Rule." 24 CFR part 60, which
obvious commercial value, such as
includes its own requirements for
mortgage performance data. HUD staff
ensuring adequate provisions to protect
may publish the results of their
the privacy of human subjects research. 6
scholarship and analysis in any forum,
HUD does not tolerate plagiarism, or
so long as they do not claim to speak for
fabrication or deliberate
the Department.
mischaracterization of data by staff,
7 See https://www.archives.gov/files/federal-
contractors or grantees who are engaged
register/executive-orders/pdf/12866.pdf for the
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/about/pdr
in evaluation activity.
original order, and see https://www.archives.gov/
learningagenda.html.
federal-register/executive-orders/1993-clinton.ht
5
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/about/PDR-
6
https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/
for citations of, and links to, other executive orders
Research.html.
retrieveECFR?n=pt24.1.60.
that amended or supplemented this order.
