HUD Capacity
Assessment for
Research, Evaluation,
Statistics, and
Analysis
OF
Sin
S.
*
AND
IDDR
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development I Office of Policy Development and Research
HUD Capacity Assessment for Research,
Evaluation, Statistics, and Analysis
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Policy Development and Research
March 21, 2022
HUD Capacity Assessment
Contents
1. Background
1
2.
Overview of HUD's Evidence-Building Capacity
2
Activities and Operations Being Assessed
2
How Evidence Building Supports HUD Offices
3
Balancing Competing Objectives for Evidence Building
3
Evidence-Building Personnel and Practices
4
Developing Human Capital for Evidence Building
5
3. Criteria for Evidence-Building Capacity Assessment
5
Coverage
6
Quality
7
Methods
10
Effectiveness
11
Independence
12
4. Perceptions of HUD Managers about Evidence-Building Capacity
13
HUD Senior Manager Survey
13
GAO Federal Managers Survey
13
Effective Data for Program Management
14
Effective Evaluation for Policy Development
19
Staff Skills and Tools for Evidence Building
23
5. Conclusion
25
6.
Appendix A. OMB Circular A-11 (2021) Requirements for a Capacity Assessment
27
ii
HUD Capacity Assessment
1. Background
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) administers a diverse array of programs
including, among others, low-rent public housing, assisted multifamily housing, and tenant-based rental
assistance; Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgage insurance; the Ginnie Mae guaranty on
mortgage-backed securities; lead hazard control and healthy homes grants; investigation, compliance,
and enforcement of fair housing and civil rights; and community development and housing block grants,
homeless assistance grants, and disaster recovery support. Since HUD was established from its
predecessor agencies in 1965, research, statistics, and using other evidence have been central in shaping
policy.
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act¹ (Evidence Act) signed into law in 2019 created
several new mandates for federal agencies to undertake evidence building in a more systematic way.
New officials must be appointed to oversee program evaluation, data governance, and statistical
activities. Stakeholders must be consulted and multi-year learning agendas developed to identify
research questions that need to be answered to inform policy. The Office of Management and Budget
has defined a learning agenda as "a systematic plan for identifying and addressing policy questions
relevant to the programs, policies, and regulations of the [organization]." Annual evaluation plans must
be developed to help implement learning agendas. "Capacity assessments for research, evaluation,
statistics, and other analysis"-suc as the assessment summarized in this document-must be
conducted to gauge internal capabilities and needs to develop and use evidence effectively.
In implementing the Evidence Act, HUD has had the advantage of an existing internal evaluation office,
the Office of Policy Development and Research (PD&R), that had previously coordinated stakeholder
consultation and development of two research agendas ("Research Roadmaps") 3,4 that covered
overlapping five-year periods. HUD was initiating development of a third Research Roadmap when the
Evidence Act was passed and integrated some of its newly required elements to develop the Learning
Agenda.
The Evidence Act's capacity assessment mandate, however, posed a new challenge for HUD and for
PD&R. It broadened HUD's conceptual frame for evidence-building capacity beyond PD&R's regular
research, evaluation, and statistical business. Under the Evidence Act, evidence-building capacity must
include research, data collection, performance assessment, and analysis activities and needs throughout
the Department explicitly in an enterprise-wide perspective. Government-wide directives and guidance
on the content of the Capacity Assessment are clarified in OMB's Circular A-11. This Capacity
1
Public Law 115-435; ;https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ435/PLAW-115publ435.pdf.
2
OMB. Circular No. A-11 (2021), section 290.7, What is a Learning Agenda (i.e., "Evidence-Building Plan")?
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/a11.pdf.
3 HUD. 2013. HUD Research Roadmap: FY 2014-2018. https://www.huduser.org/portal/about/pdr roadmap.html,
4
HUD. 2017. Research Roadmap: 2017 Update. https://www.huduser.gov/portal/pdf/ResearchRoadmap-2017Update.pdf
1
HUD Capacity Assessment
Assessment is integral to HUD's FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan5 and will be updated periodically in
subsequent strategic plans.
2. Overview of HUD's Evidence-Building Capacity
As required by the Office of Management and Budget, 6 this capacity assessment covers four categories
of evidence-statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis-and assesses them in terms of five criteria-
coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence. Discussion of the four categories of
evidence is woven throughout this document. The balance of Section 2 addresses five required
components of a capacity assessment. Section 3 provides a narrative assessment using the five criteria.
Section 4 supplements the narrative assessment with data from a new survey of HUD managers about
their perceptions of the current state of evidence building pertaining to their programs. Section 5
provides a concluding summary.
Activities and Operations Being Assessed
The scope of this capacity assessment encompasses major active HUD program areas as well as key
support functions that encompass evidence building related to program areas as a central function. The
universe for the Government Accountability Office survey reported in Section 4 includes managers
across the Department. The universe for HUD's survey of senior managers reported in the same section
is
slightly narrower. It includes senior managers with responsibilities for managing one or more major
programs and selected managers involved in evidence building through evaluation, performance
management, and data governance functions (N = 17). Program offices who participated in the survey
include the following:
Office of Public and Indian Housing-public housing and assisted housing programs
Office of Housing-FHA mortgage insurance, assisted multifamily housing, housing counseling,
and manufactured housing
Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes (OLHCHH)-lead hazard mitigation and
healthy homes grants
Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity-fair housing and civil rights investigation,
compliance, and enforcement
Office of Community Planning and Development-community development block grants, HOME
investment partnership grants, homeless assistance grants, disaster recovery grants, and other.
Support offices included in the assessment include the following:
Office of Field Policy and Management
Office of Policy Development and Research
Office of the Chief Financial Officer
5
HUD. HUD Draft FY22-26 Strategic Plan Focus Areas. https://www.hud.gov/HUD-FY22-26-Strategic-Plan-Focus-Areas
6
Circular A-11 (2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/a11.pdf. Section 290.13. See Part 6 in
Appendix A of this document.
2
HUD Capacity Assessment
Office of the Chief Information Officer
Support functions not included in the universe for the HUD survey effort include legal counsel,
administration, human resources, information technology, and public affairs.
How Evidence Building Supports HUD Offices
The Office of Policy Development and Research is HUD's central, independent office for evaluation,
economic and statistical analysis, policy development support, and coordination of data governance.
HUD's Evaluation Officer, Chief Data Officer, and Statistical Official positions are all located in PD&R. The
development of a HUD Research Roadmap that informs the Learning Agenda has been initiated at
intervals of roughly three years during the past decade since PD&R began development of the first
Research Roadmap in FY 2012. It and subsequent Roadmaps take the needs of internal stakeholders
from across the Department as a central input in prioritizing evidence-building work.
Additional centers for evaluation and analytics are found across the Department. The Office of Lead
Hazard Control and Healthy Homes has authorization to conduct evaluations of lead hazard mitigation
protocols and study healthy homes technical issues. Offices of evaluation, policy development, and risk
assessment found within various program offices also contribute to evidence building. Notable offices
with such functions include the Office of Risk Management office in FHA; the Real Estate Assessment
Center and the Office of Policy, Programs, and Legislative Initiatives in the Office of Public and Indian
Housing; and the Office of Systemic Investigations within the Office of Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity. Their input on evidence-building needs is central to development of HUD's Learning
Agenda, and they will benefit from increased coordination of evidence building under the authority of
the Evidence Act and a new department-wide Program Evaluation Policy Statement.
Balancing Competing Objectives for Evidence Building
OMB guidance recognizes that federal agencies call upon evidence-building efforts and activities to
address a range of needs in addition to informing policymakers: organizational learning-"the - process of
improving actions through better knowledge and understanding";7 ongoing management of programs,
performance, and strategic initiatives; interagency and private sector coordination; internal and external
oversight; and accountability.
To substantial extent, HUD evidence-building efforts successfully balance these competing objectives.
This balance is reflected in diverse activities:
HUD has established processes of executive reviews of strategic goals' and Agency Priority
Goals' progress informed by performance dashboards. Information derived from evidence
building is integrated into Annual Performance Plans.
7 It has been noted that, "Scholars have proposed a variety of definitions of organizational learning." David A. Garvin. 1993.
Building a Learning Organization. Harvard Business Review. July-August 1993. https://hbr.org/1993/07/building-a-learning
organization, citing, above, one such definition, from C. Marlene Fiol and Marjorie A. Lyles. 1985. "Organizational Learning."
Academy of Management Review. 10 (4). 1 Oct 1985. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1985.4279103
3
HUD Capacity Assessment
PD&R engages with program offices on a quarterly basis to review evaluation and research
progress and emerging needs. PD&R also presents quarterly research updates about major
evaluations or policy topics to internal and external audiences.
As part of HUD's iterative research roadmapping and Learning Agenda development process,
PD&R seeks program office input to identify research questions that are emerging through
policy developments and interactions with external stakeholders.
PD&R conducts rigorous program demonstrations, evaluations, and research to support policy
development and accountability, coordinates review of policy implications, and disseminates
research products to diverse stakeholders. OLHCHH also undertakes rigorous program
evaluations and environmental health research supporting their programs and policy. These
complementary research efforts are fully integrated in HUD's evidence-building plans.
Employee-led knowledge collaboratives share insights and undertake initiatives to advance
mission-related common interests, information, and skill development across organizational
boundaries.
HUD makes significant annual investments in the American Housing Survey and other survey
data assets to establish a data infrastructure for housing and community development policy,
practice, and research.
HUD routinely enhances data assets through data linkages and makes them available to
researchers through data licensing and research data centers.
HUD's Geocoding Service Center spatially enhances demographic and economic data to
facilitate program decisions and improvements, as well as the assessment of fair housing and
civil rights impacts-for example, marketing housing to underserved populations, locating new
housing projects in accordance with HUD's site and neighborhood standards, and maximizing
the use of accessible public and assisted housing units for households who need the particular
features of these units.
Opportunities to strengthen organizational learning are available in connection with internal assessment
of various projects, as opportunities to conduct systematic "after action reviews" and document lessons
learned frequently are carried out. Such methods have been found to improve the efficiency and
consistent reliability of processes through better documentation, communication, and process maturity.
Evidence-Building Personnel and Practices
PD&R's research and evaluation staff was funded at 165 full-time equivalents in FY 2021, which included
39 staff in headquarters and the field who support program operations with economic analysis of
housing markets and 12 new positions to stand up the Office of the Chief Data Officer. The PD&R staff
size and skill mix is marginally adequate for administering evaluation and research activities at current
funding levels for the Research and Technology account, as the mandates of the Evidence Act have
increased workloads. Dissemination of research findings includes contract support associated with the
HUDUSER.gov web portal and online publications. Dissemination of best practices also includes
Community Compass technical assistance funded through the Research and Technology account.
4
HUD Capacity Assessment
Improving data quality, making effective use of administrative data assets, and strengthening HUD's
open data program will require significant new investments in data governance and creating an
enterprise solution.
PD&R staffing is not adequate to complete all evaluation and research proposals identified for the office
in HUD's Learning Agenda: not all research contracts could be administered nor all inhouse research
opportunities pursued. A National Research Council (2008) review-which can be viewed as an
independent capacity assessment that few agencies have available-concluded that PD&R should
increase inhouse research. 8 PD&R efforts since then to increase inhouse capacity have included
increasing to about 16 the number of staff with special sworn status for access to restricted Census
data,9 developing a research data center to facilitate secure access, and leveraging opportunities for
data linkages. Certain skillsets such as statisticians and research economists are in short supply. Inhouse
researchers first focus on HUD's urgent needs such as developing program parameters, conducting
regulatory impact assessments, supporting program office needs, and responding to Congressional
requests. Such priorities leave little time for potentially high-value but non-urgent research. A
substantial proportion of PD&R staff members with advanced social science degrees are employed in
monitoring contract research rather than conducting inhouse research; maintaining contract research
certifications requires extensive annual training that further reduces inhouse research time.
Developing Human Capital for Evidence Building
Evidence-building capacity within program activities could be usefully expanded in several directions.
First, training in such evaluation principles as logic models, counterfactuals, research design, and
randomization would strengthen awareness of the complementary roles of performance monitoring and
formal evaluation. Broader availability of reliable administrative data extracts and contextual data,
business intelligence systems, and dashboards could support real-time awareness of operational trends,
outputs, and outcomes to enable material improvements in performance. Providing skilled assistance
with advanced analytics and modeling could strengthen risk analysis and monitoring. Finally, clearer
guidance about best practices for incorporating evidence requirements in grant programs would be
beneficial.
3. Criteria for Evidence-Building Capacity Assessment
HUD's capacity to generate and use evidence through statistics, evaluation, research, or analysis may be
assessed usefully on the basis of five criteria: the extent of coverage of evidence-building activity, quality
of data, use of rigorous and appropriate methods, effectiveness of the activities for stakeholders, and
independence.
8 National Research Council. 2008. "Rebuilding the Research Capacity at HUD.' Washington, DC.
  https://www.nap.edu/catalog/12468/rebuilding-the-research-capacity-at-hud
9
At least 18 HUD staff have obtained Special Sworn Status, including 4 whose status has lapsed. PD&R has 2 more analysts with
pending status.
5
HUD Capacity Assessment
In this section each criterion is applied to the four categories of evidence. The subcriteria used in making
the assessments are listed for each criterion. The assessments reflect discussion among HUD career staff
with decades of direct experience generating statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis at HUD. The
assessments have an element of subjectivity but benefit from input from multiple perspectives and first-
hand experience with the strengths and limitations of HUD's capacities in these areas.
The four categories of evidence assessed using the five criteria are summarized in the following table:
Categories of Evidence Assessed
Statistics
Evaluation
Research
Analysis
HUD-sponsored
Program evaluations,
Descriptive data
Policy analysis,
surveys, administrative
program
analysis, inferential
performance
data, data linkages
demonstrations,
data analysis,
measurement and
randomized
geospatial analysis,
analysis
controlled trials, case
literature reviews,
studies
regulatory impact
analysis
Coverage
Considerations: Comprehensiveness, appropriateness, targeting
Statistics. The comprehensiveness, appropriateness, and targeting of HUD's statistical, evaluation,
research, and analysis activities ensure that such evidence building provides substantial coverage of
most programs with annual appropriations. HUD uses standard, recognized methodologies in conducting
each of these evidence-building activities and relies on research roadmapping and Learning Agenda
consultation processes to frequently reassess whether the scope, depth, and focus remain relevant for
stakeholders. To improve the comprehensiveness, appropriateness, and targeting of statistical
information, data linkage has been a key strategy. Data linkages strengthen the coverage of statistics to
encompass policy domains such as health and education that overlap with HUD's core mission. Such
linkages include both linkages with administrative data of federal sister agencies and linkages of
administrative data with survey data.
Evaluation. Formal program evaluations typically focus on major program policy questions with the
most rigorous methods, so programs that are relatively small, stable, or difficult to evaluate may not be
evaluated often. HUD has at times missed opportunities to conduct rigorous, large-scale evaluations and
inform stakeholders about the impacts and cost effectiveness of some major initiatives. 10 Formal
program evaluation also is constrained for programs that have low levels of evaluability because they
operate through funding streams rather than defined program activities (for example, block grant
programs) or through commitment authority (for example, FHA mortgage insurance and Ginnie Mae
guaranties). Evaluation, research, and policy analysis supporting such programs typically have a
10
NRC, 2008: pages 3-10.
6
HUD Capacity Assessment
narrower scope, focusing on specific policy issues rather than questions of overall impact or cost
effectiveness. Data collection also may be limited to administrative data, or to purchases of commercial
datasets related to mortgage markets.
Research. The coverage of statistical, evaluation, research, and analysis activities is primarily guided by
the stakeholder-informed research prioritization of HUD's learning agendas. This process prioritizes
research that is more pertinent to evolving evidence-building needs rather than systematically
undertaking evaluation or other research across HUD program areas according to a fixed schedule or
structured comprehensive framework. Should increased evaluation resources become available, there is
an opportunity to conduct a systematic assessment to increase the uniformity of coverage with regard
to the National Research Council's 2008 recommendation for PD&R to "regularly conduct rigorous
evaluations of all of HUD's major programs." 11 Generally, HUD has had sufficient financial and staff
resources to complete only a fraction of research proposals featured in past Research Roadmaps.
Analysis. The coverage of analysis activities for the purposes of program monitoring and performance
management, while good, has potential for improvement. The HUDstat performance management
system that HUD used for several years and was recognized as an advance reflecting leadership's
commitment to data-driven decision-making¹² was subsequently mothballed, and a new system remains
under development. Performance metrics and milestones could be enhanced by selection of more
outcome metrics and contextualization of administrative data with external data sources, which could
better support targeting. Identification of common data elements across program activities and
standardization to the extent possible would make enterprise data more feasible and increase the utility
of administrative data for improving program management and building evidence. The Office of the
Chief Data Officer has identified such standardization as an early priority, beginning with a catalog of
standard tenant data elements that will facilitate future data collections, and supporting a data
inventory that will make the sources of data transparent for users.
Quality
Considerations: Availability, completeness, timeliness, accuracy, integrity, utility
Statistics. Relating to the quality of statistical evidence, the national survey data that HUD and the
Census Bureau collect are quite good as the agencies have jointly made numerous improvements in
recent years. The National Research Council (2008) judged that providing public-use datasets is one of
PD&R's most important functions and that the American Housing Survey even then was one of the
federal government's richest datasets. Most of the subcriteria for this element-availability,
completeness, accuracy, integrity, and utility-are free of notable deficiencies. The Census Bureau and
HUD work closely to make improvements to development and cognitive testing of survey questions,
11 Ibid. See page ES-2.
12 HUDstat was a PerformanceStat or "stat" process in which ongoing, data-driven meetings involve agency leaders in
identifying key challenges, diagnosing problems, devising solutions, and tracking results. See pages 27 and 30 in Feldman,
Andrew, 2017. "Strengthening Results-Focused Government: Strategies to Build on Bipartisan Progress in Evidence-Based
Policy.' Washington, DC: Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/es 20170130 evidencebasedpolicy.pdf.
7
HUD Capacity Assessment
sampling, survey field work, weighting, and making publicly available data from a number of national
surveys. Surveys sponsored by HUD and conducted by the Census Bureau include the American Housing
Survey, the Rental Housing Finance Survey, the Manufactured Housing Survey, and several other surveys
tracking monthly, quarterly, or annual changes in the nation's housing. These surveys have been
enhanced in recent years through engagement with data users, addition of topical modules, greater use
of technology, improved statistical rigor, and much more matching to administrative records. HUD and
the Census Bureau collaborate extensively on the complex process of preparing survey data for public
release in timely ashion-usually about 12 months for a major survey such as the AHS. Processing steps
include extensive quality checks, missing data imputation, weighting, and merging administrative data.
Survey administrators need to take extra care in releasing data when there is a disruption in data
collection, as recently occurred when the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted reporting on homeownership
rates. Interagency collaborations to support rapid review and release of the experimental Pulse survey
data during the pandemic offer lessons for other surveys. HUD also collaborates with the Census Bureau
to make special purpose products available, such as monthly Housing Market Indicator reports and
enhanced tabulations of the American Community Survey that are essential for Consolidated Planning
assessments.
Statistics based on administrative data are fairly good with respect to utility, objectivity, and integrity.
HUD is notable for the data it collects on both the 4.6 million households with rental assistance and the
more than 8 million households with FHA-insured mortgages. With these data, HUD has made
substantial progress in interagency collaborations to match tenant data for the Department's largest
public and assisted housing programs with Census surveys, National Center for Health Statistics surveys,
and federal administrative data. Tenant data are fairly complete, and integrity of tenant incomes is
supported by the availability of income data through HUD's Enterprise Income Verification system. Yet
weaknesses in tenant data include incomplete address records that hinder geospatial analysis and less-
frequent and modified reporting requirements for Moving to Work (MTW) agencies due to the various
flexibilities that MTW agencies can implement. When high-frequency transactional data are not
collected on the same individuals, the potential value of prediction methodologies such as Artificial
Intelligence systems may be limited. Administrative data also have blind spots for such important things
as what happens to households after they leave assistance or exit the FHA program. HUD is undertaking
several targeted studies of post-exit outcomes using data linkages; such research could inform
improvements to tenant data collection.
Administrative data related to the Community Development Block Grant and other block grant programs
are good for a general understanding of investments and approximate location of those investments,
but improvements are warranted to support stronger evaluations of these flexible programs. Data on
HUD programs serving Native American tribes are also very limited. The Homeless Management
Information Systems operated by homeless service providers provide crucial individual-level data on
system use, including prior and subsequent stays in specific programs. HUD's access to these critical
data, however, is limited to annual national summary reporting because of privacy considerations. The
Department also has additional work to do, under the oversight of the Chief Data Officer and the Data
Governance Board, in complying with open data requirements of various statutes.
8
HUD Capacity Assessment
Important non-HUD programs in which HUD has substantial interest, such as the Low-Income Housing
Tax Credit and Opportunity Zones, have improved administrative data but would benefit from
substantial further investment by HUD and the Department of the Treasury. Further advances for
evidence-based policy in these critical areas would require significant improvements in coordination and
possibly a statutory waiver to permit use of federal tax information for such purposes.
HUD's Learning Agenda, like this Capacity Assessment, is a standalone component of HUD's Strategic
Plan. The Learning Agenda includes, under the heading Enhanced Data and Methods, 14 proposed
projects to strengthen the quality, utility, and access to HUD data assets. The Learning Agenda also
documents deficiencies in data availability in a number of important areas that HUD is seeking to
address:
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit property addresses
Opportunity Zones investments, activities, and outputs
Post-exit outcomes of assisted renters
Locations of activities funded by CDBG and HOME
Energy consumption and expenditure data for public and assisted housing
Lead hazard control grant administrative data
Picture of Single-family FHA-insured households
PHA waiting lists and admissions preferences
Sexual orientation and gender identity data
Evaluation. The quality of HUD's evaluation and demonstration work is very good. As provided by HUD's
Program Evaluation Policy Statement, 13 the Department uses strong research designs when possible and
makes the resulting reports and data available for further analysis. Since its founding HUD has supported
a number of important demonstrations and other evaluations-employing rigorous experimental
methods-that have led to major policy changes. The Experimental Housing Allowance Program
demonstrations of the 1970s and subsequent research on the use of tenant-based rental assistance
were instrumental in the creation and subsequent changes to what is now the largest housing assistance
program run by HUD, the Housing Choice Voucher program. In recent years, data from such studies as
Moving To Opportunity (impact of moving from high poverty to low poverty neighborhoods),
Administrative Fee study (the cost to administer the Housing Choice Voucher program), and Family
Options (studying interventions to address family homelessness) have been utilized by numerous
researchers and policymakers. HUD makes these data available for further analysis through a
combination of access at Census research centers, direct data licenses with researchers, and cooperative
agreement research.
13
Office of Policy Development and Research, HUD. Published in 86,154 Federal Register 44738, (August 13, 2021). Docket No.
FR-6278-N-01, FR Doc. 2021-44738.https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2021-17339.
9
HUD Capacity Assessment
Research and Analysis. The quality of the Department's research and analysis efforts is also good. HUD
has a core of research staff with skills well-suited for conducting a limited number of research studies
and analyses with timeliness, accuracy, integrity, and utility. Availability of such work remains a
constraint, however, because advanced research and analysis skillsets are more scarce than optimal
levels.
Methods
Considerations: Range, Rigor, Suitability
Statistics. The methods used for HUD's statistics are very good in terms of range, rigor, and suitability.
National surveys, targeted surveys, centralized administrative data collection, locally retained
administrative data (Homeless Management Information Systems), and other collections are all well-
suited for specific contexts. Statistical data often are enhanced with geospatial information and several
data linkage strategies and are released in a variety of open data products accessible to practitioners,
policymakers, and researchers, subject to privacy protections. HUD also is developing an agency-wide
Customer Experience (CX) capability.
Evaluation. For evaluation as well, HUD uses a spectrum of research, data collection, and analytic
methods selected to address specific evidence-building needs. The HUD Program Evaluation Policy
Statement 14 commits the Department to using the most rigorous methods that are appropriate to the
evaluation questions and feasible within budget and other constraints, covering impact evaluations,
implementation or process evaluations, descriptive studies, outcome evaluations, and formative
evaluations, and both qualitative and quantitative approaches. Program demonstrations using gold-
standard random control trial methods have been central to PD&R's research portfolio for decades and
have become dominant in recent years. Evaluations generally must use a treatment group and
counterfactual when feasible to isolate the program impacts from other factors. HUD's guideline for
rigor also requires that researchers seek to understand and correct for implicit bias in the formulation of
research questions and methods.
Research and Analysis. Research and analysis activities as well are covered by the Evaluation Policy's
guidelines about rigor, independence, and ethics.
HUD's Learning Agenda: Fiscal Years 2022-2026 discusses a wide range of methods that encompass all
four categories of evidence:
Program demonstrations
Quasi-experimental evaluations
Econometric analysis
Descriptive statistical analysis
Case studies
Ethnographic methods
14 Ibid.
10
HUD Capacity Assessment
Literature reviews and systematic reviews
Performance metrics and dashboards
Surveys
Advanced analytics
Behaviorally informed program evaluation
Effectiveness
Considerations: Policy influence, program guidance, advances in theory
HUD's statistics, evaluations, research, and analytics are meeting substantial needs of stakeholders, with
particular strengths in the areas of homelessness policy and assisted housing policy. The National
Research Council's (2008) review of PD&R's research and evaluation activities concluded that most of
the work was "high quality, relevant, timely, and useful" and made "valuable contributions in several
notable areas" but that inadequate funding had significantly eroded capacity to perform effectively. 15
PD&R research efforts since the NRC review have sustained the quality of research, improved the
availability and usefulness of data products, strengthened the emphasis on gold-standard experimental
methods, involved stakeholders in establishing research priorities, and established a program evaluation
policy to institutionalize consistent practices. These enhancements have been supported by sustained
funding increases that began in FY 2010. PD&R's combined appropriation for core research, evaluations,
and demonstrations totaled $72.2 million for FY 2021, representing a real increase of more than 20
percent from average funding during the 3 years (FY 2006-FY 2008) preceding the NRC review. 16
Statistics. HUD-sponsored statistical products such as the American Housing Survey (AHS) have provided
the core of the nation's housing data infrastructure for decades, supporting reporting to Congress on the
unmet need for affordable and assisted housing, providing data on structural characteristics and housing
finance, and through its unique longitudinal design, information on conditions, use, and affordability of
the housing stock. HUD is using an AHS research module to develop a preliminary Housing Insecurity
index, which after testing and refinement may provide a major theoretical advance in the ability to
associate housing problems with a range of household outcomes and the capacity to include a
transferable module of housing insecurity questions in a variety of other surveys similar to the USDA
Food Insecurity module.
Evaluation. HUD's evaluation activities have good effectiveness. A majority of HUD managers who
responded to GAO's 2020 survey reported that they have systematically tracked implementation of
recommendations from evaluations (see exhibit 5, question 22i). Major randomized controlled trials
over the years have provided seminal evidence about the usefulness of tenant-based rental assistance,
tenant mobility policy, and permanent housing as a solution for family homelessness, transforming
housing and community development legislation. Policy domains that have unmet needs include
15
National Research Council. Op. cit. See page ES-1.
16 Totals for PD&R's Research and Technology account, excluding funding for University Partnerships and Technical Assistance.
The FY 2006-FY2008 appropriations were $37.2 million, $50.1 million, and $50.8 million in current dollars
11
HUD Capacity Assessment
intractable, "wicked" problems such as the housing affordability crisis, housing discrimination, self-
sufficiency, community development, regulatory barriers, and disaster recovery and resilience. Such
issues may bring further challenges such as a lack of reliable data, unacceptability of random assignment
methods, or serious difficulty in establishing a counterfactual for evaluation; addressing such challenges
satisfactorily may consume substantial resources over the Learning Agenda timeframe.
Generally, HUD's evidence building is meeting the needs of stakeholders. Evaluations and other research
products are disseminated appropriately, and the iterative outreach process of research roadmapping
has given stakeholders the opportunity to communicate emerging issues and unmet needs in evaluation
and research priorities, including needs identified through lived experiences of HUD beneficiaries.
Research and Analysis. Research and analysis activities have fairly good effectiveness as well. Policy and
program constraints, however, may limit responses to such evidence in some cases. There is potential to
increase effectiveness of performance management by more systematically using outcome measures
that are supported by metrics guided by program logic models, and by increasing availability and use of
business intelligence systems for managers. These issues are discussed in relation to survey results
shown in exhibits 2, 3, and 5.
Independence
Considerations: Organization, policy, culture
Statistics. The independence of HUD's statistics is excellent for survey data and good for administrative
data. HUD's partnership with the Census Bureau for major surveys provides highly qualified external
review of decisions about the data, and the availability of these data through online table creators and
dataset downloads ensures transparency about published reporting of the data. PD&R also releases
administrative data for HUD-assisted households as user-friendly summary files and as public-use
microdata (PUM) files and provides restricted-use access to external researchers through data licenses.
Evaluation. The centralization of most major program evaluation for the Department within the
independent office of PD&R serves well to ensure independence of HUD's evidence-building activities.
The HUD Program Evaluation Policy Statement includes commitments to transparency and
independence that ensure that the most critical evidence-building function, evaluation, is conducted
without regard to whether findings are positive and are reported in a clear way. PD&R protects
independence and objectivity in the design, conduct, and analysis of evaluations through competitive
award to researchers who are free of conflicts of interest. The transparency policy provides that HUD
will release methodologically valid evaluations without regard to the findings. Additionally, transparency
is safeguarded by contract language that allows researchers to publish independently even if HUD
should choose not to publish, for example, if HUD should have concerns about the validity of findings.
HUD's Evaluation Policy also provides that HUD will, where possible, archive administrative and
evaluation data for secondary use by interested researchers.
Research and Analysis. Research and analysis have guarantees to independence similar to those of
evaluation. HUD staff are permitted to publish the results of their scholarship and analysis in any forum,
so long as they do not claim to speak for the Department. PD&R also publishes a peer-reviewed journal,
12
HUD Capacity Assessment
Cityscape, that provides a venue for multi-disciplinary, independent contributions from internal and
external authors about a wide range of housing and community development issues.17 The results of
analysis conducted for performance management purposes are published in HUD's Annual Performance
Reports 18 and on the Performance.gov website.
4. Perceptions of HUD Managers about Evidence-Building Capacity
HUD Senior Manager Survey
PD&R undertook primary data collection for the Capacity Assessment by conducting a survey of HUD
senior managers during late August and early September 2020. The survey instrument was developed
under the oversight of the Evaluation Officer by a working group that included senior program
evaluators and analysts involved in developing HUD's learning agenda.
The core of HUD's survey comprised 17 affirmative statements that collectively reflect a well-rounded
capability to generate and use evidence. The online survey was administered to a purposive sample of
senior managers who have responsibility for one or more HUD programs, as well as additional managers
who have responsibilities involving evidence building. Managers with responsibility for support functions
were not included in this exploratory survey because their relationship to evidence building is expected
to be somewhat different. Eighteen managers from across the Department responded to the survey, for
a response rate of 56 percent.
Participants were asked to report whether and how strongly they agree that each statement reflects
their program. The results suggest that HUD managers perceive that the Department has a moderately
good baseline capacity in these areas. Across all 17 statements (denoted Q1-Q17), an average of 20
percent of respondents "strongly agree" and another 41 percent "agree" with the statements, totaling
61 percent who strongly agree/agree. Several questions about data and evaluation received "not
applicable" responses from managers engaged in budget, strategic planning, or evaluation as their
primary program activity. The results of the HUD Senior Manager survey are presented in exhibits 3, 6,
and 8 below.
GAO Federal Managers Survey
Concurrently with HUD's survey effort, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) administered its
annual government-wide survey of federal managers. The 2020 GAO Federal Managers Survey (exhibits
1, 2, 4, 5, and 7) placed a heavy emphasis on the use of performance data and evaluation for evidence
building as envisioned by the Evidence Act. GAO has made available the results on "government
performance and management issues" collected for individual agencies such as HUD.19
17 See tps://www.huduser.gov/portal/periodicals/cityscape.html.
18 See https://www.hud.gov/program offices/cfo/reports/cforept.
19
Government Accountability Office. 2021. "Supplemental Material: 2020 Federal Managers Survey: Results on Government
Performance and Management Issues." https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-537sp.
13
HUD Capacity Assessment
In this section, the results of the HUD survey and the GAO survey are considered in tandem as they
pertain to three broad domains of evidence-building capacity:
Effective Data for Program Management-accessible, reliable, and useful data for use in
monitoring and measuring performance of programs.
Effective Evaluation for Policy Development-progra demonstrations, evaluations, and
research that provide rigorous evidence about program implementation, outcomes, impacts,
and cost-effectiveness.
Staff Skills and Tools for Evidence Building-human capacity to build and apply appropriate tools
and methods to analyze data, statistics, and performance metrics for program improvement,
and to understand the implications of evaluations for program management and policy.
Effective Data for Program Management
Together, GAO's survey and HUD's survey paint a somewhat positive picture of Effective Data for
Program Management.
In GAO's 2020 Manager Survey, about 73 questions relate primarily to the Effective Data for Program
Management topic. A selection of 39 of these questions-whicl include a substantial emphasis on
performance data-is presented in Exhibits 1 and 2.
Exhibit 1 shows that similar proportions of HUD managers report (for questions 24a-24c) having the
three main types of information available for use in their program management: administrative data,
statistical data, and research and analysis. These information sources each received strong combined
positive responses of "very great extent" or "great extent" (24.0-26.4 percent) in the GAO survey. A
smaller fraction of managers provided negative responses, indicating that such information sources are
not available for their program activities, with research and analysis being most frequently lacking with
14.5 percent combined negative responses.
Managers use such information for a wide variety of program management purposes (questions 25a-
25m). Combined positive responses ranged from a low of 18.9 percent for allocating resources (25f) to a
high of 28.4 percent for providing context for or explaining performance results (25d). The strongest
combined negatives were using available data for allocating resources, at 17.1 percent, followed by
refining program performance measures, at 13.7 percent (25e). The last two questions shown in Exhibit
1 address institutional matters. Item 27f concerns the availability of measures and controls to protect
data security and privacy and received combined positive responses totaling 48.4 percent. Question 27g
assesses perceptions of top leadership commitment to using a variety of data and information sources
for making program and policy decisions. Responses to this question in 2020 reflect combined positive
responses of 23.0 percent.
14
HUD Capacity Assessment
Exhibit 1. HUD Manager Responses to GAO on Information Sources and Usage
for Program Management, 2020 (n = 90)
24a. [Types of information available for program]: Administrative data
11.2
12.8
15.4
5.6
4.9
50.0
24b. [Types of information available for program]: Statistical data
13.0
13.4
13.8
3.9
6.3
49.7
24c. [Types of information available for program]: Research and analysis
10.6
13.8
8.9
8.2
6.3
52.2
25a. [Use made of such information]: Providing context about the
7.2
18.8
15.5 2.
2
54.6
problem the program is designed to address
25b. [Use made of such information]: Setting or revising program
17.8
16.7
3.8
5
54.5
priorities and goals
25c. [Use made of such information]: Developing program strategy
6.7
20.7
12.5
4.6)
.1
54.5
25d. [Use made of such information]: Explaining or providing context
7.7
20.7
13.5
3.7
2.4
52.1
for performance results
25e. [Use made of such information]: Refining program performance
18.4
9.2
4.1
9.6
54.6
measures
25f. [Use made of such information]:Allocating resources
13.6
9.5
11.2
5.9
54.6
25g. [Use made of such information]: Identifying opportunities to
7.7
19.8
15.5
3.7
1.2
52.1
improve program performance
25h. [Use made of such information]: Identifying and sharing effective
6.2
17.2
14.0
9.2
1
52.4
program approaches with others
25i. [Use made of such information]: Adopting new program approaches
16.9
18.1
6.42
51.0
or changing work processes
25j. [Use made of such information]: Identifying opportunities to
8.3
14.9
16.4
3.4.
53.3
reduce, eliminate or better manage duplicative activities
25k. [Use made of such information]: Coordinating program efforts
18.4
15.9
4.8
5
52.2
within your agency or with other external entities
25l. [Use made of such information]: Identifying opportunities to
6.0
19.0
12.1
5.12.
55.5
support the program's activities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic
27f. My agency has information systems and processes in place to
15.1
33.3
18.9
6.8
1.1
38.3
protect the privacy and security of its data
27g. My agency's top leadership demonstrates a strong commitment to
18.0
19.3
8.3
71.7
using a variety of data and information in decision making.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Very great extent
Great extent
Moderate extent
Small extent
No extent
Not Applicable or Missing
15
HUD Capacity Assessment
Exhibit 2 summarizes some of the GAO survey's extensive coverage of performance measurement issues
and use of performance information. Most of the questions shown received strong positive responses,
usually with well over 20 percent of respondents choosing "Very great extent" or "Great extent.'
Response patterns reflect strengths in several areas:
availability of a variety of performance measures (3b, 4a-4g)
use of performance information for program strategy, resource allocation, identifying
performance problems, and taking corrective actions (6d-6g)
routinely communicating performance information to stakeholders (8c)
periodically reviewing performance information with senior managers (8d)
strong leadership commitment to achieving results (14a)
Seven of these 20 questions drew strong negative responses from HUD managers, with "Small extent" or
"No extent" together exceeding 20 percent of responses. These seven questions suggest needs for
improving evidence-building capacity in these areas, complicated by 4a and 8c, which each drew both
strong positives and strong negatives:
availability of performance measures of output costs and of equity (4a, 4f)
routinely communicating performance information to stakeholders (8c)
leadership commitment to using performance data for decisionmaking (14b)
routine leadership communication of performance information (14c)
leadership attention to using performance information for management decisionmaking (14d)
increasing use of performance information for management decisionmaking over time (14e)
16
HUD Capacity Assessment
Exhibit 2. HUD Manager Responses to GAO on Performance Information for Program Management,
2020 (n = 90)
3b. There are meaningful performance measures for my program(s)
20.2
34.4
21.5
6.9
17.0
4a. We have performance measures that tell us the amount of
11.9
20.7
15.4
19.0
8.7
24.4
resources being used to develop, maintain or deliver the products or
4b. We have performance measures that tell us how many things we
24.3
39.4
10.8
8.5
17.0
produce or services we provide (Output measures)
4c. We have performance measures that tell us about the quality of
14.3
32.5
18.2
14.2
3
18.6
the products or services we provide (Quality measures)
4d. We have performance measures that tell us if we are operating
12.4
29.8
19.5
10.5
8.6
19.2
efficiently (Process measures)
4e. We have performance measures that tell us whether or not we
12.6
25.6
25.1
11.8
6.4
18.6
are satisfying our customers (Customer service measures)
4f. We have performance measures that tell us how the products or
11.9
23.0
16.9
11.0
14.2
23.1
services we provide are distributed across different populations
4g. We have performance measures that would demonstrate whether
23.2
34.7
16.0
5.6
17.0
or not we are achieving our intended results (Outcome measures)
6d. [We use performance management information for:] Developing
15.7
27.0
19.2
5.8
7.1
25.2
program strategy
6e. [We use performance management information for:] Allocating
17.0
22.0
20.3
7.3
5.9
27.6
resources
6f. [We use performance management information for:] Identifying
22.2
26.2
14.3
9.5
$
24.3
program problems to be addressed
6g. [We use performance management information for:] Taking
21.6
28.0
15.2
6.82
$
26.0
corrective action to solve program problems
8c. I communicate performance information about my program(s) on
18.7
30.4
23.0
13.3
7.4
7.4
a routine basis to internal and external stakeholders
8d. The individual I report to periodically reviews with me the results
19.4
35.8
22.2
11.8
4.7
or outcomes of the program(s)
13e. My agency is investing in resources to improve the agency's
8.9
24.6
15.2
13.7
4.0
33.6
capacity to use performance information
14a. My agency's top leadership demonstrates a strong commitment
17.4
35.2
23.4
10.2
7.0
6.9
to achieving results
14b. My agency's top leadership demonstrates a strong commitment
16.8
21.5
25.0
17.1
5.4
14.3
to using performance information to guide decision making
14c. My agency's top leadership communicates performance
9.5
23.8
25.1
26.1
9.8
5.7
information throughout the organization on a routine basis
14d. My agency's top leadership pays attention to the use of
10.8
19.2
22.7
20.5
5,9
20.9
performance information in management decision making..
14e. Compared to three years ago, my agency's top leadership pays
12.7
19.9
20.4
11.8
14.4
20.7
more attention to the use of performance information in...
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Very great extent
Great extent
Moderate extent
Small extent
No extent
Not applicable or Missing
17
HUD Capacity Assessment
HUD's survey of senior managers included six questions addressing Effective Data for Program
Management (exhibit 3). For these six questions, an average of 56 percent of the senior manager
respondents chose combined positive responses of strongly agree or agree.
Three of these questions, however, also generated some of the largest combined negative responses.
Disagree or strongly disagree accounted for 28 percent of responses about availability of outcome data
for households and individuals (Q1); 39 percent of responses about availability of outcome data for
communities (Q2); and 33 percent of responses about business intelligence (BI) systems and data for
tracking program performance (Q10). Q10 also accounted for the largest proportion of "strongly
disagree" responses, at 11 percent, suggesting pockets of substantial need for better business
intelligence data and systems.
Although such BI systems are available in the Department, individual managers may not be aware of
their availability or capabilities, or linkages to necessary data may need to be created. Several efforts are
underway to improve capacity for using BI systems. The Office of the Chief Information Officer offers BI
desktop applications as HUD-standard software for staff who request it and offers a suite of courses on
how to use it effectively. To complement such technological skills, the Chief Data Officer is developing a
data skills program that includes data management, data literacy, and data quality improvement.
Exhibit 3. Senior Manager Responses on Effective Data for Program Management, 2020 (n = 18)
1. I have reliable data for assessing how my programs affect
17%
39%
6%
28%
11%
outcomes for households and individuals.
2. I have reliable data for assessing how my programs affect
11%
22%
11%
39%
17%
outcomes for communities.
8. I have reliable data to identify fraud, waste, and abuse and to
monitor compliance of program partners with their commitments
6%
33%
28%
17%
17%
and all applicable statutes and regulations.
9. I receive data about program accomplishments that are useful,
17%
61%
17%
6%
timely, and specific.
10. I have business intelligence systems and data that allow me to
track the spending, operations, and performance of programs and
11%
44%
6%
22%
11%
6%
make strategic decisions in a timely way.
11. I have data needed to support effective coordination with
17%
56%
6%
11%
11%
external partners.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Strongly agree
Agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Disagree
Strongly disagree
Not applicable
Taken together, the GAO survey and HUD survey suggest that the Department's moderately strong
performance management capabilities could be strengthened by investments in better outcome data
about communities and individual beneficiaries-including measures of equal opportunity and equity-
and by better integration of supporting metrics that provide context and enable alignment of program
outputs and outcomes with the resources consumed, consistent with program logic models.
18
HUD Capacity Assessment
Limitations of the availability, robustness, and quality of administrative data generally pose an important
constraint for evidence-based policy and programs. Upgrading administrative data requires attention to
data infrastructure-no just information technology infrastructure. The robustness of administrative
data collections may be constrained by statutory authorization or by concerns of excessive reporting
burden for HUD's program partners-especially when collection of outcome data is considered. Data
systems may lack safeguards to prevent submission of erroneous data or may suffer from chronic
underreporting or missing data. Funding for development, modernization, and enhancement of
administrative data systems has been limited, due in part to the persistently high cost of basic
operations and maintenance of these systems. In many cases, administrative data could be
strengthened substantially by providing dynamic linkage with external data sources and advanced
analytic capabilities, but it is crucial to collect the needed data elements. For such reasons, a key
component of the CDO's Data Program is improving data governance. Data governance provides
guidance for data decisions involving policies, investments, and orchestration of people, process, and
technology. Robust administrative data capabilities are essential for effective business intelligence
systems and research.
Effective Evaluation for Policy Development
GAO's Manager Survey included numerous questions assessing managers' perceptions about evaluation.
Unfortunately, only 43.5 percent of HUD managers responded that they had at least a small extent of
familiarity with evaluation at the Department, with correspondingly large fractions of "not applicable" or
missing responses to subsequent questions about evaluation (exhibit 5, 17a).
Even smaller fractions of managers responded affirmatively to questions about past experience with
evaluation activity either as an evaluator or evaluation client (exhibit 4). Only 7.5 percent reported
managing evaluators (18b), and 14.2 percent reported serving on an evaluation team (18d). Almost 20
percent, however, reported using the results of evaluations to make performance improvements (18e).
Exhibit 4. HUD Manager Responses to GAO on Past Program Evaluation Roles,
2020 (n = 90)
18a. [Have served in this evaluation function]: Leader or member of an agency
14.1
29.4
56.5
team that identified or prioritized research questions for potential evaluation(s)
18b. [Have served in this evaluation function]: Evaluator who has managed third
34.3
58.2
parties responsible for conducting evaluation(s)
18c. [Have served in this evaluation function]: Member of the program staff that
20.5
22.4
57.1
provided program information or context to evaluators
18d. [Have served in this evaluation function]: Evaluator or member of a team
14.2
26.5
59.3
that conducted evaluation(s)
18e. [Have served in this evaluation function]: Manager who has used the
19.8
21.9
58.3
results of the evaluation(s) to make performance improvement decisions
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Yes
No
Missing or Nonresponse
19
HUD Capacity Assessment
The low response rates for GAO's survey questions about evaluation probably result from two main
factors. First, significant numbers of HUD managers may have declined to respond or chosen "not
applicable" for evaluation questions in GAO's survey because they are employed in support offices or
functions such as budgeting, human resources, information technology, or the Inspector General, and
thus do not operate "programs." Second, substantial numbers of staff are employed in program offices
such as the Federal Housing Administration or Ginnie Mae that receive resources in the form of
commitment authority rather than spending authority. Such program areas are subject to annual
financial reporting requirements and have not been major clients for formal program evaluation in the
recent past.
Among respondents in the GAO survey who reported some degree of familiarity with program
evaluation (exhibit 5, 17a) and completed followup questions (17b-22i), combined positive responses
were generally more prevalent than combined negatives.
20
HUD Capacity Assessment
Exhibit 5. HUD Manager Responses to GAO on Effective Evaluation for Policy Development,
2020 (n = 90)
17a. I am familiar with program evaluation(s) at my agency.
14.6
14.0
10.1
27.1
29.4
17b. I have access to program evaluation(s) I need to manage my
15.3
11.4
8.6
58.2
program(s).
19a. [Evaluation results are used for]: Implementing changes to improve
13.4
10.2
6.0
3
62.4
program performance
19b. [Evaluation results are used for]: Adopting new program
5.8
13.4
10.2
6.2
4
61.0
approaches, operations, or processes
19c. [Evaluation results are used for]: Sharing effective program
8.1
15.8
6.7
8.41
1
59.9
approaches or lessons learned
19d. [Evaluation results are used for]: Allocating resources within the
13.9
11.4
5.4
5
61.1
program
19e. [Evaluation results are used for]: Explaining or providing context
16.6
5.9
8.3
61.2
for performance results
19f. [Evaluation results are used for]: Informing the public about the
6.44.5
10.3
6.7
69.2
program's performance, as appropriate
20a. [For your programs]: Evaluations addressed issues important to key
6.9
9.8
6.9
4.81.1
70.6
stakeholders
20b. [For your programs]: Evaluations were completed without undue
7.5
12.9
2.7
1
72.8
influence
20c. [For your programs]: Evaluations were technically rigorous (i.e.,
5.9
11.1 2.7 4.1
2.3
74.0
they produced accurate, valid, and high quality evidence)
20d. [For your programs]: Evaluation results had clear implications for
6.3
12.9
2
8
6.3
2.3
69.4
program improvement
20e. [For your programs]: Evaluation results were delivered in time to
14.2
1
6 6.4
.3
70.5
be useful
20f. [For your programs]: Evaluation recommendations were feasible to
13.6
6
7.6
.1
71.6
implement with existing resources
22a. [About evaluations of your program]: Agency top leadership was
12.9
64.6
6
76.2
committed to using evaluations
22b. [About evaluations of your program]: Congress supported the use
1
6.4
4.6
0.5
84.8
of evaluations
2.1
22c. [About evaluations of your program] Evaluations of my program
1
7
12.7
3.62
2.5
77.0
were guided by an agency evaluation plan
22d. [About evaluations of your program]: Evaluations were guided by
1
7
12.7
3.62
2.1
77.4
agency evaluation policies
22e. [About evaluations of your program]: Evaluations involved
5.4
8.3
8.5
7
72.8
consultation with key staff in my program
22f. [About evaluations of your program]: Evaluations involved
1
11.3
.106
82.3
consultation with key external stakeholders
22g. [About evaluations of your program]: Disagreements among
0.
65.2
6.9
6
85.8
stakeholders were easy to resolve
22h. [About evaluations of your program]: Evaluation results were made
1
8.3 1
1.6
84.0
easily accessible and available to the public, as appropriate
1.4
22i. [About evaluations of your program]: My program systematically
0
6 12.7
5.4
6
77.9
tracked the implementation of evaluation recommendations
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Very great extent
Great extent
Moderate extent
Small extent
No extent
Not Applicable or Missing
21
HUD Capacity Assessment
The responses to the GAO question 17b, "access to program evaluations needed to manage my
program," are worth noting. This question received combined negative responses of 11.3 percent,
suggesting that a significant fraction of HUD managers have an unfulfilled need for a program
evaluation. (Omitting not applicable and missing responses would increase this figure to 27 percent of
responding managers.) This perceived need for evaluation may be related to the elevated level of
negative responses to 19f regarding use of evaluation results to inform the public about program
performance.
HUD's Senior Manager survey included six questions related to the Effective Evaluation topic (exhibit 6).
For these six questions, an average of 53 percent of respondents selected positive responses of strongly
agree/agree.
One question about data and evidence to improve program targeting, Q7, had significant negative
responses of 28 percent. It should be noted that the wording of Q7 applies to data capacity about as
much as it does to evaluation capacity.
Three other questions in exhibit 6 also show negative responses exceeding 20 percent. These data
suggest that lack of evidence about cost effectiveness (Q4) and lack of evidence about the impact of
changes in program policy (Q5) are areas of concern for some senior managers. Such concerns point to a
potential need for a systematic assessment of evidence-building needs across programs. Some senior
managers also expressed a lack of influence over HUD's research agenda (that is, the Learning Agenda;
Q12). Although HUD's program offices were engaged at multiple points in developing the Learning
Agenda and past research roadmaps, it is possible that opportunities to participate were not broadly
shared within all components of program offices. HUD will review the internal stakeholder participation
process supporting future iterations of learning agenda development to ensure that the evidence-
building needs of diverse components are captured.
Exhibit 6. Senior Manager Responses on Effective Evaluation for Policy Development,
2020 (n = 18)
3. I have evidence about public benefits of my programs that
17%
28%
39%
17%
policymakers find convincing.
4. I have evidence about the cost-effectiveness of my program that
11%
44%
17%
17%
6%
6%
policymakers find convincing.
5. I receive useful and timely evidence about the effects of changes in
6%
33%
33%
17%
6%
6%
program policies and regulations.
6. I have access to the data and evidence that would be needed to
justify a proposed change in program scale or design to achieve
11%
44%
28%
11%
6%
greater public benefits.
7. I have the data and evidence that would be needed to strengthen
11%
44%
6%
22%
6%
11%
program targeting to improve outcomes.
12. I have opportunity to influence HUD's research agenda to answer
22%
44%
11%
17%
6%
policy-relevant questions related to my programs.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Strongly agree
Agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Disagree
Strongly disagree
Not applicable
22
HUD Capacity Assessment
Staff Skills and Tools for Evidence Building
Exhibit 7 presents HUD's results for 18 questions from the GAO Manager Survey that relate staff skills
and tools for evidence building.
Combined negatives exceeded 20 percent of all responses for two questions: agency investment to
ensure that performance information is of adequate quality (13c); and staff with the skills to collect,
analyze, and use performance information (13d).
If not applicable and missing responses are ignored, then combined negatives exceed 20 percent for
several additional questions. Although these items suggest potential pockets of need, in each case
combined positive responses exceeded combined negatives, reflecting substantial variation across the
Department:
investing to improve the agency's capacity to use performance information (13e)
quarterly performance reviews include staff with relevant knowledge to facilitate problem
solving and identify improvement opportunities (16e)
program staff receive training in program evaluation (21d)
agency staff (27c) and program staff (26a) with skills to collect, analyze, and use statistics,
research, and analysis
agency analytical tools (27b) and program staff access to such tools (26b) to collect, analyze, and
use statistics, research, and analysis
agency investment to improve capacity to collect, analyze, and use statistics, research, and
analysis (27d)
agency staff with skills to integrate findings from performance measurement, program
evaluations, and additional types of information (27e)
The large proportions of middling "moderate extent" responses to several questions-about staff skills
(8b, 13d) and access to analytical tools to collect, analyze, and use performance information (8a)-
suggest there may be potential to achieve significant gains in capacity at relatively modest cost. Several
efforts are underway to improve capacity for using BI systems. The Office of the Chief Information
Officer offers BI desktop applications as HUD-standard software for staff who request it and offers staff
a suite of courses on how to use it effectively. This effort is complemented by new OCDO data program
training being developed to strengthen data literacy and data management skills needed to populate BI
systems and use evidence effectively.
23
HUD Capacity Assessment
Exhibit 7. HUD Manager Responses to GAO on Staff Skills and Tools for Evidence Building,
2020 (n = 90)
3c. Program staff and I have a shared understanding of the
31.4
33.1
14.4
5.2
15.9
definitions used to measure performance
8a. I have access to the analytical tools needed to collect, analyze,
10.0
30.9
38.0
15.6
1.
3.7
and use performance information
8b. Staff involved in the program(s) collectively have the knowledge
16.9
26.7
36.5
11.6
17.2
and skills needed to collect, analyze, and use performance
13c. My agency is investing the resources needed to ensure that its
8.0
24.9
22.0
17.6
5.9
21.6
performance information is of sufficient quality
13d. My agency has staff with the knowledge and skills needed to
11.1
22.2
32.4
16.1
4.8
13.3
collect, analyze, and use performance information
13e. My agency is investing in resources to improve the agency's
8.9
24.6
15.2
13.7
0
33.6
capacity to use performance information
16b. [About quarterly performance reviews]: My agency has the
1.
10.0
4.3
.3
81.7
capacity to analyze the performance information needed for these
16e. [About quarterly performance reviews]: These reviews include
1
6.5 4.43.2
84.2
staff with relevant knowledge to facilitate problem solving.
21a. Program staff have the skills necessary to conduct program
5.7
14.7
10.5
5.0
1.2
63.0
evaluations
21b. Program staff have the skills necessary to understand program
5.7
17.4
10.0
2.71.2
63.0
evaluation methods, results, and limitations
21c. Program staff have the skills necessary to implement evaluation
5.7
17.4
9.3
3.4
1.2
63.0
recommendations
21d. Program staff receive training in program evaluation (e.g.,
13.0
7.3
6.9
.5
65.4
formal classroom training, conferences, on the job training)
26a. [About statistics, research and analysis]: Program staff
.2
12.6
15.3
10.3
54.7
collectively have the knowledge and skills needed to collect,
26b. [About statistics, research and analysis]: I have access to the
5.6
12.7
14.5
10.2
5
53.6
analytical tools needed to collect, analyze, and use these.
27b. [About statistics, research and analysis]: My agency has the
24.5
21.6
17.5
1.1
30.9
analytical tools needed to collect, analyze, and use these.
27c. [About statistics, research and analysis]: My agency has staff
7.7
21.5
28.1
14.3
28.4
with the knowledge and skills needed to collect, analyze and use
27d. [About statistics, research and analysis]: My agency is investing
11.7
21.9
13.8
$
44.6
resources to improve its capacity to collect, analyze, and use these
27e. My agency has staff with the knowledge and skills to integrate
8.4
16.5
24.2
12.0
2.4
36.6
and compare findings from performance measurement, program
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Very great extent
Great extent
Moderate extent
Small extent
No extent
Not applicable or Missing
24
HUD Capacity Assessment
For the five Staff Skills questions contained in HUD's Senior Manager survey, an average of 76 percent of
respondents selected strongly agree/agree (exhibit 8). Staff skills thus appear to be, in the eyes of
responding senior managers, the least-weak area of HUD's evidence-building capacity. The strongest
negative responses among these questions, 23 percent disagree/strongly disagree, were returned for
Q17-which - like Q10 addresses the analytic tools and data assets available to staff.
In comparison with the relatively small sample of senior managers, the HUD managers responding to the
GAO survey were somewhat more negative concerning the adequacy of agency investments in good
data, good systems, and adequate training to support effective performance analysis and management.
Exhibit 8. Senior Manager Responses on Staff Skills and Tools for Evidence Building,
2020 (n = 18)
10. I have business intelligence systems and data that allow me to track
the spending, operations, and performance of programs and make
11%
44%
6%
22%
11%
6%
strategic decisions in a timely way.
13. My staff has the capacity to understand evaluations and other
39%
33%
17%
11%
research-based evidence that is relevant to improving outcomes.
14. My staff has skills to identify and develop the information needed to
33%
50%
6%
6%
6%
run my programs.
15. My staff has skills to tabulate, analyze and interpret the information
28%
44%
17%
6%
6%
needed to run and improve my programs.
16. My staff has skills to communicate program purposes, processes, and
56%
33%
11%
outcomes.
17. My staff has the tools and data assets needed to generate, analyze,
22%
39%
11%
17%
6%
6%
and communicate information about my programs.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Strongly agree
Agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Disagree
Strongly disagree
Not applicable
5. Conclusion
Reading together the results of the qualitative staff assessment, the GAO 2020 Manager Survey, and the
HUD Senior Manager Survey, HUD's evidence-building capacity is seen to have significant strengths as
well as areas needing improvement. Perceptions of staff skills range across the spectrum. It is likely that
some offices have, at best, modest capacity to analyze data and evidence effectively. Large proportions
of "[to a] moderate extent" responses to survey questions about staff skills suggest that, in numerous
offices, investments in training may generate significant gains in analytic capacity at relatively modest
cost. Generalized increases in demand for data analysis across the Department, however, also may
require additional hiring of skilled staff.
25
HUD Capacity Assessment
Topics for which survey respondents were most likely to return negative responses relate to inadequate
data and systems for measuring and managing program performance. The responses to GAO's questions
about the types of performance measures available to managers suggest significant gaps in performance
information related to resource use and distributional outcomes, and effective use and communication
of performance information (Exhibit 2). Senior managers responding to HUD's survey reported the lack
of adequate information about outcomes or effects of HUD's programs on communities and on
households, evidence for and effects of policy change (including program targeting policy), and the
ability to monitor waste and performance of program partners (Exhibits 3 and 6). Such responses are
consistent with this Capacity Assessment's review of the strengths and weaknesses of HUD's
administrative data.
The evidence lends credence to the substantial emphasis placed in the Evidence Act on the
improvement and rationalization of data governance to support evidence-based policymaking.
The survey findings complement the qualitative evidence of this Capacity Assessment, which frame a
relatively strong program of evaluation, research, statistics and analytics that is centered in the Office of
Policy Development and Research. The evaluation program draws strength from throughout the
Department as the importance of building and deploying evidence effectively is increasingly well
understood, and as program offices are engaged in identifying their learning and research priorities to
develop the new Learning Agenda.
26
HUD Capacity Assessment
6. Appendix A. OMB Circular A-11 (2021) Requirements for a Capacity
Assessment
20
290.13 What is the Capacity Assessment for Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis that is
required as part of the Evidence Act?
The Evidence Act requires agencies to submit a Capacity Assessment for Statistics, Evaluation, Research,
and Analysis (hereinafter referred to as "Capacity Assessment") every four years as part of their Strategic
Plans. Led by the Evaluation Officer, in conjunction with the Statistical Official, Chief Data Officer, and
other agency personnel, this requires agencies to conduct and provide an assessment of the coverage,
quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of the statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis
efforts of the agency. Thus, agencies should assess their statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis
activities against the following criteria:
Coverage: what is happening and where is it happening?
Quality: are the data used of high quality with respect to utility, objectivity, and integrity?
Methods: what are the methods being used for these activities, do these methods incorporate
the necessary level of rigor, and are those methods appropriate for the activities to which they
are being applied?
Effectiveness: are the activities meeting their intended outcomes, including serving the needs of
stakeholders and being disseminated?
Independence: to what extent are the activities being carried out free from bias and inappropriate
influence?
For each of the areas of assessment-statistics, evaluation, research and analysis-OMB encourages
agencies to consider the above criteria and think about how those criteria apply for each of these activities
within the agency.
In considering the criterion above, agencies must also address the following as part of the Capacity
Assessment for Statistics, Evaluation, Research, and Analysis:
A list of the activities (e.g., programs, initiatives, etc.) and operations (e.g., administrative and
support tasks) of the agency that are currently being evaluated and analyzed;
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency support the needs of various divisions within the agency;
The extent to which the evaluation, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency address an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational learning, ongoing
program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency and
private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability;
20
Office of Management and Budget. 2021. "Circular No. A-11: Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget."
ttps://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/a11.pdf (single file) or https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/a11 web toc.pdf (individual sections). Strategic planning, performance management, and evidence
building topics are contained in Part 6. Additional guidance for the Capacity Assessment is found in sections 290.14 and 290.19.
27
HUD Capacity Assessment
The extent to which the agency uses methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate
to agency divisions and the corresponding research questions being addressed, including an
appropriate combination of formative and summative evaluation research and analysis
approaches;
The extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present within the agency to include
personnel and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities,
disseminating best practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback; and
The extent to which the agency has the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to
develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-
day operations.
These specific requirements tie directly to the statutory criteria and address elements such as coverage
(i.e., the list of activities and operations of the agency that are currently being evaluated or analyzed) and
effectiveness (i.e., the extent to which these activities meet the needs of the agency and appropriately
balance across those needs). In addition, these requirements touch on important areas like dissemination
of findings from statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis activities (i.e., does the agency have processes
and procedures in place to make sure findings are disseminated?), as well as the agency's capacity to use
these findings (i.e., does the agency have processes, procedures, and trained staff in place to use the
findings to support agency learning, improvement, and decision-making?) As agencies assess their capacity
in the areas of coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence, it is important to consider not
only whether and how the agency is doing those activities, but also whether they have staffing,
infrastructure, and processes to do so. In that sense, this Capacity Assessment should be holistic,
considering the agency's current capacity, but also what future capacity might be needed.
The Capacity Assessment is expected to provide agencies with a baseline against which they can measure
improvements to coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of their statistics,
evaluation, research, and analysis activities. The Capacity Assessment will provide senior officials with
information needed to improve the agency's ability to support the development and use of evaluation,
coordinate and increase technical expertise available for evaluation and related research activities within
the agency, and improve the quality of evaluations and knowledge of evaluation methodology and
standards.
In conducting the assessment, agencies should draw on existing OMB guidance and policies, including, but
not limited to:
OMB Memorandum M-21-27, Evidence-Based Policymaking: Learning Agendas and Annual
Evaluation Plans;
OMB Memorandum M-19-23, Phase / Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance;
OMB Memorandum M-20-12, Phase 4 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018: Program Evaluation Standards and Practices;
OMB Memorandum M-19-15, Improving Implementation of the Information Quality Act;
OMB Memorandum M-18-04, Monitoring and Evaluation Guidelines for Federal Departments
and Agencies that Administer United States Foreign Assistance;
Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of
Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies; and
28
HUD Capacity Assessment
OMB Statistical Policy Directives.
In developing the Capacity Assessment, OMB encourages agencies to use a format, process, and structure
that best meets their specific context. There is no template or specific format for this document, but OMB
expects that each agency's assessment will include discussion and analysis of the five criteria (i.e.,
coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence) for their statistics, evaluation, research,
and analysis activities, including those specific components listed above. The Capacity Assessment must
be a standalone component of the agency strategic plan. Agencies may include it as a separate section,
chapter, appendix of, or document referenced in and posted along with, the strategic plan. If an agency
chooses to include the Capacity Assessment as an appendix or separate referenced document, they must
summarize the Capacity Assessment somewhere in the body of the strategic plan.
29
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Policy Development and Research
Washington, DC 20410-6000
OFF
un the *
April 2022
EQUAL HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY
