Learning Agenda:
Fiscal Years 2022-2026
OF
Sin
S.
*
AND
IDDR
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development I Office of Policy Development and Research
Learning Agenda:
Fiscal Years 2022-2026
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Policy Development and Research
March 28, 2022
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Contents
1. Introduction
2
2.
Learning Questions for Evidence Building
9
Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
9
Core Housing Programs
13
Disaster Recovery, Energy, and Climate Change
19
Fair Housing
25
Homeownership
30
Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
35
Housing and Health
40
Indian and Tribal Issues
43
Self-Sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
45
Vulnerable and Special Populations
49
Enhanced Data and Methods
56
3.
Data Priorities for Evidence Building
63
Data Governance
63
Priority Data Gaps, Needs, and Challenges
71
Methods for Evidence-Building
74
Barriers to Evidence-Building
78
4. Implementing the Learning Agenda
82
Documenting New and Ongoing Evaluation Activities
82
Assessing and Increasing Evidence-Building Capacity
82
Resources for Implementing the Research Agenda
82
Appendix A. How this Learning Agenda was Developed
85
Appendix B. List of Learning Questions by Policy Topic
87
Works Cited
93
i
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
1. Introduction
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) administers a diverse array of programs
including, among others, public housing, assisted multifamily housing, and tenant-based rental
assistance; Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance; the Ginnie Mae guaranty on mortgage-
backed securities; lead hazard control and healthy homes grants; fair housing and civil rights
investigation, compliance and enforcement; community development and housing block grants;
homeless assistance grants; and disaster recovery support. 1 Since HUD's establishment in 1965,
research, statistics, and other evidence have been central in shaping policy. Research is especially key to
the Office of Policy Development and Research (PD&R) mission of providing reliable and objective
research on housing and community development that is relevant for HUD and its constituents and that
enables informed policy decisions. PD&R focuses on finding definitive answers to questions about what
programs work and how they can be made better through quick-turnaround studies and long-term
evaluations that systematically assess impacts and outcomes and shed light on paths to improvement. In
this way, PD&R helps drive HUD's evidence-based policymaking, promoting the best possible policies
and programs through accurate data, rigorous research, and sound policy advice. As a part of this effort,
PD&R leads the development of the HUD Learning Agenda, which integrates input from diverse
stakeholder groups to define a four-year research and evidence building plan for the Department.
This Learning Agenda identifies key research opportunities for HUD to highlight for Congress in budget
requests and Annual Evaluation Plans to generate a robust pipeline of research. More than previous
evidence building plans, this Learning Agenda integrates evidence-building priorities for research and
data collection from across the Department and aligns with HUD's strategic goals and objectives. This
Learning Agenda reflects a renewed process of stakeholder outreach and collaboration to identify the
most policy-relevant and timely research questions and evidence-building challenges in the fields of
housing and community development.
Requirements of the Evidence Act
In recent years, an evidence-based policy movement has transformed the federal context for research,
evaluation, and evidence-building. Building on the recommendations of the Commission on Evidence-
Based Policymaking (2017), Congress passed the bipartisan Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act ("Evidence Act") of 2018.² The Evidence Act and the Office of Management and
Budget's implementing guidelines establish a number of important new requirements for federal
agencies:3
1 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/programs-of-hud.htm!
2
Public Law 115-435 (132 STAT. 5529). "Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018."
https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ435/PLAW-115publ435.pd
3 The primary implementation guidance is found in Memorandum M-19-23 (OMB, 2019a) and Circular A-11 (OMB, 2021; see
Section 290, Evaluation and Evidence-Building Activities). M-19-23 notably defines evidence broadly to include program
evaluation, performance measurement, foundational fact-finding, and policy analysis.
2
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Appointing Evaluation Officers, Chief Data Officers, and Statistical Officials to better govern and
support the development and use of evidence across the enterprise
Developing "evidence-building plans" or learning agendas that are aligned with departmental
strategic plans and include these elements:
Policy-relevant questions for which evidence will be developed
Data to be acquired to facilitate the use of evidence in policymaking
Methods and analytical approaches for developing evidence
Challenges for evidence development, including restrictions to data access
Steps to be taken to develop evidence for policymaking
Developing Annual Evaluation Plans, based on learning agenda priorities, that identify the key
questions each planned "significant" evaluation study will address and the key information
collections or acquisitions to be initiated
Conducting agency-wide Capacity Assessments relating to the ability to generate and use
evidence
Developing data governance strategies in support of HUD's Open Data Policy of collecting and
creating information in ways that allow for easy access and reuse by the public
Strengthening statistical standards and confidentiality protections
OMB usefully characterizes a learning agenda as a "systematic plan for identifying and addressing policy
questions relevant to the programs, policies, and regulations of the agency" and a "systemic way to
identify the data agencies intend to collect, use, or acquire as well as the methods and analytical
approaches to facilitate the use of evidence in policymaking."4
Evolution of the Research Roadmap into the Learning Agenda
HUD has been a leader among federal agencies in developing forward-looking evidence building plans.
PD&R released its first Research Roadmap FY 2014-FY 2018 in July 20135 and updated content in 2017
and again in 2020.6 Over time the focus of the Roadmap broadened, going from including specific
budget and cost estimates tied to specific requests to focusing on more aspirational project ideas. At
their core, however, these research plans have served to document the diverse interests in the housing
and community development research field and to identify the needs and opportunities for evidence
building within HUD programs.
HUD's experience developing the Roadmaps dovetails well with the requirements of the Evidence Act,
but the Evidence Act has also spurred an important evolution in HUD's planning. Past Roadmaps
4
tps://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/M-19-23.pdf
5 PD&R launched the first research roadmapping process in response to an assessment by the National Research Council (2008)
that concluded that, in addition to better and more stable funding, PD&R needed to incorporate a more collaborative and
robust agenda in order to maximize its funding and research capacities.
6
All three Research Roadmaps are available at https://www.huduser.gov/portal/about/pdr learningagenda.html.
3
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
centered around research projects for PD&R to conduct, and often were the basis for requests to
Congress for evaluation funding or the framework for in-house research. Starting with the Research
Roadmap: 2020 Update, which served as the Department's Interim Learning Agenda, the team has
sought to broaden the focus to include evidence building efforts across HUD. This Learning Agenda
presents a Department-wide set of questions and will be an actionable guide that can inform a wide
swath of evidence building activities.
Stakeholder Engagement
Input and support from members of the academic community, practitioners implementing programs,
and policymakers at the federal, state, and local levels has helped inform the development of HUD's
evidence building plans since the first Roadmap in 2013. Feedback and direct collaborative
conversations with these stakeholders is invaluable in helping identify the most policy-relevant and
timely research questions in the fields of housing and community development. Stakeholder
engagement strategies have evolved over the course of the last decade. Updates in 2017 and 2020
broadened the use of web-based tools and expanded targeted outreach to external stakeholders.
The Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026 used the Interim Learning Agenda (the Research Roadmap: 2020
Update) as a foundation and launched a renewed stakeholder engagement effort using a combination of
online outreach and collaborative virtual meetings. The Learning Agenda team asked stakeholders to
consider the content of the Interim Learning Agenda and to identify what needed to be added and what
needed to be amended. HUD recorded hundreds of suggestions from stakeholders that included HUD
leadership, HUD career staff, external researchers, representatives of policy and advocacy organizations,
people with lived experience in HUD programs, and staff at the federal, state, and local level. The
resulting list of learning questions constitutes Section 2 of the Learning Agenda.
The stakeholder engagement process does not end when the Learning Agenda is published. The
Learning Agenda team will continue to seek feedback from internal and external partners and revisit the
priority research questions and the structure through which the Department will approach answering
them. This ongoing stakeholder engagement is consistent with the intent that the Learning Agenda be a
living document that is revisited periodically throughout the four-year operational window. More
information about the Learning Agenda team's approach and process for stakeholder engagement can
be found in Appendix A.
Alignment with the Strategic Plan and Administration Priorities
The Evidence Act closely associates Learning Agendas with agency Strategic Plans. Agency strategic plans
must include material on evidence building, align with agency Learning Agendas and reflect knowledge
gained through evidence-building activities. HUD's Learning Agenda is designed to support the goals and
objectives articulated in HUD's Fiscal Year 2022-2026 Strategic Plan and shown in Exhibit 1.
4
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Exhibit 1. HUD's Strategic Goals and Objectives, Fiscal Year 2022-2026
Strategic Goals
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Goal 1: Support Underserved
1A: Advance Housing Justice
Communities-Fortify support for underserved
1B: Reduce Homelessness
communities and support equitable community
1C: Invest in the Success of Communities
development for all people.
Strategic Goal 2: Ensure Access to and Increase
2A: Increase the Supply of Housing
Production of Affordable Housing-Ensure housing
2B: Improve Rental Assistance
demand is matched by adequate production of new
homes and equitable access to housing opportunities
for all people.
Strategic Goal 3: Promote Homeownership-
3A: Advance Sustainable Homeownership
Promote homeownership opportunities, equitable
3A - Major Initiative: Expand Homeownership
access to credit for purchase and improvements, and
Opportunities
wealth-building in underserved communities.
3B: Create a More Accessible and Inclusive Housing
Finance System
Strategic Goal 4: Advance Sustainable
4A: Guide Investment in Climate Resilience
Communities-Advance sustainable communities by
4B: Strengthen Environmental Justice
strengthening climate resilience and energy
4C: Integrate Healthcare and Housing
efficiency, promoting environmental justice, and
recognizing housing's role as essential to health.
Strategic Goal 5: Strengthen HUD's Internal
5A: Enable the HUD Workforce
Capacity-Strengthen HUD's internal capacity and
5B: Improve Acquisition Management
efficiency to better ensure delivery of HUD's mission.
5C: Strengthen Information Technology
5D: Enhance Financial and Grants Management
5E: Improve Ease, Effectiveness, and Trust in HUD
Services
Centering Equity
Consistent with President Biden's Executive Order 13985, HUD seeks to integrate equity considerations
into all facets of the Department's work, including the Learning Agenda. To guide this long-term equity
work, HUD established an Equity Leadership Committee comprising career and political staff and an
Equity Working Group with participation from a variety of HUD offices.
During the first 200 days of the Biden-Harris Administration, this equity team completed the
Department's first equity assessment. The Department has also created other issue-specific task forces
that align with HUD's broader equity work and will develop an Agency Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and
Accessibility Strategic Plan. As these workstreams develop and mature, HUD anticipates updates to the
priority learning questions and/or research questions in HUD's Learning Agenda. This version of the
Learning Agenda includes learning questions addressing the following aspects of topics that reflect
HUD's equity focus:
Increasing equitable access to homeownership and other wealth-building opportunities;
Understanding and addressing the health needs of disadvantaged populations in HUD-assisted
housing;
5
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Assessing how recipients of HUD funds address their responsibilities to Affirmatively Further
Fair Housing; and
Filling data gaps identified in HUD's first equity assessment.
The Learning Agenda includes questions and project descriptions that incorporate a focus on equitable
outcomes, implementation, and impacts of HUD programs and policies. The team collaborated with
HUD's Equity Leadership Committee and Equity Working Group to ensure that the Learning Agenda fully
supports the Department's learning needs with respect to reversing inequities in federal housing policy
and practice and prioritizing equity in all HUD programs.
HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement
HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement articulates the core principles and practices of HUD's evaluation and
research activities (HUD, 2021). HUD updated the Evaluation Policy Statement in August 2021,
reaffirming the Department's commitment to conducting rigorous, relevant evaluations and to using
evidence from evaluations to inform policy and practice. The Department's Evaluation Policy applies to
all HUD-sponsored evaluations and regulatory impact analyses; the policy also applies to the selection of
projects, contractors, and HUD staff that are involved in evaluations.
Section 311 of the Evidence Act7 defines "evaluation" to mean "an assessment using systematic data
collection and analysis of one or more programs, policies, and organizations intended to assess their
effectiveness and efficiency." HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement identifies six core principles and
practices as fundamental to ensuring high-quality and consistent evaluation results. Exhibit 2 presents
the core principles and practices with excerpts from the Evaluation Policy Statement.
Exhibit 2. Overview of Core Principles and Practices from HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement
Principle
Sample language from Evaluation Policy Statement
Rigor
"In assessing the effects of programs or services, HUD evaluations use methods that
isolate to the greatest extent possible the impacts of the programs or services from other
influences, such as trends over time, geographic variation, or pre-existing differences
between participants and non-participants."
"Where feasible, research should employ a treatment group and a counterfactual."
"In both quantitative and qualitative research, rigor means having clear research questions
and an explicit analytic framework; justification for case selection and sampling methods
in relation to research goals; and transparent, verifiable methods of systematic data
collection and analysis, auditable records, and attention to possible alternative
interpretations during analysis and writing."
7
See 5 U.S.C. 311 at ttps://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ435/PLAW-115publ435.pdf
8
HUD Evaluation Policy Statement: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-08-13/pdf/2021-17339.pdf
6
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Principle
Sample language from Evaluation Policy Statement
Relevance
"The HUD evaluation agenda reflects the legislative requirements and policy issues related
to HUD's mission."
"HUD solicits input from stakeholders, both internal and external, including stakeholders
with lived experience, such as program participants, and grantees, on the selection of
programs to be evaluated, initiatives, demonstrations, and research questions.
HUD strives to design program evaluations and other analyses to better understand
structural racism and to reveal unequal benefits and harms across social groups as
relevant.
HUD disseminates findings in ways that are accessible and useful to policymakers,
practitioners, and members of communities affected by HUD programs and policies."
Transparency
"HUD will release methodologically valid evaluations without regard to the findings."
"Evaluation reports must describe the methods used, including strengths and weaknesses,
and discuss the generalizability of the findings.'
"Evaluation reports must present comprehensive results, including favorable, unfavorable,
and null findings."
"HUD will, where possible, archive administrative and evaluation data for secondary use
by interested researchers."
Independence
"HUD conducts evaluations through the competitive award of grants and contracts to
external experts who are free from conflicts of interest."
"HUD also conducts evaluations in-house and supports unsolicited external evaluation
proposals with funding, data, or both."
"The Evaluation Officer will consult with the HUD office with lead responsibility on the
design of evaluation projects and analysis plans and will advise that office on whether to
publish evaluation reports."
Ethics
"HUD-sponsored evaluations must be conducted in an ethical manner and safeguard the
dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of participants."
...PD&R allows no disclosure of information about the characteristics of any group of
individuals or households numbering fewer than eleven by PD&R staff, contractors,
grantees, or licensees."
"HUD does not tolerate plagiarism, or fabrication or deliberate mischaracterization of data
by staff, contractors or grantees who are engaged in evaluation activity."
Technical
"PD&R supports and employs new methods of data collection and analysis that more
Innovations
reliably and efficiently answer research questions than old methods do."
Policy Framework for the Learning Agenda
To span the full breadth of Learning Activities shaping HUD's programs, the organization of the Learning
Agenda differs from that of the Department's Strategic Plan. The Learning Agenda groups learning and
research questions into 11 Policy Topics, some of which are crosscutting:
Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
Core Housing Programs
Disaster Recovery, Energy, and Climate Change
Fair Housing
Homeownership
Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
Housing and Health
7
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Indian and Tribal Issues
Self-sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
Vulnerable and Special Populations
Enhanced Data and Methods
This organizational structure reflects how teams focused on research, evaluation, and evidence building
across the department approach their work. The 11 Policy Topics are meant to capture the full scope of
issues related to HUD programs and the Department's mission but are not mutually exclusive. While the
organizational approach to sorting these questions may be distinct from that of the Strategic Plan, the
Learning Agenda is designed to build evidence in support of the Strategic Goals and Objectives
articulated by the Department. Exhibit 3 demonstrates the primary alignment of the 11 policy topics in
the Learning Agenda to the Department's five Strategic Goals, while recognizing that topics can align
with different goals in multiple ways. Each policy topic is flexible enough to contribute to most, if not all
the Strategic Goals, however we present a single primary alignment to highlight where the balance of
the research questions under each topic contribute to Departmental goals.
Exhibit 3. Alignment of Learning Agenda Policy Topics to HUD's Strategic Goals
Policy Topic
Primary Aligned Strategic Goal
Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Core Housing Programs
Goal 2: Ensure access to and increase production of
affordable housing
Disaster Recovery, Energy, and Climate Change
Goal 4: Advance sustainable communities
Fair Housing
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Homeownership
Goal 3: Promote Homeownership
Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
Goal 2: Ensure access to and increase production of
affordable housing
Housing and Health
Goal 4: Advance sustainable communities
Indian and Tribal Issues
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Self-sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
Goal 2: Ensure access to and increase production of
affordable housing
Vulnerable and Special Populations
Goal 1: Support underserved communities
Enhanced Data and Methods
Goal 5: Strengthen HUD's internal capacity
8
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
2. Learning Questions for Evidence Building
The research questions featured in this Learning Agenda are organized by the 11 policy topics. Each
policy topic has a Foundational Learning Question that is supported by a set of Priority Research
Questions. Appendix B provides a full list of Foundational Learning Questions and Priority Research
Questions by policy topic. Each Priority Research Question includes a proposed project or set of activities
the Department could pursue to address the question. These short descriptions of research, evaluation,
and data collection activities are not meant to present a definitive approach but rather to offer a
potential, feasible path to addressing these pressing questions. HUD expects to continue to refine the
learning questions and proposed approaches over the lifecycle of the Learning Agenda through ongoing
stakeholder engagement and feedback on administration and Congressional priorities.
Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
As reflected in HUD's name, urban and community development activities are central to many of the
Department's programs. Improving the physical character, housing quality, public safety, economic
opportunity, amenities, and equity in the built environment is essential to helping communities and
their residents thrive. The research questions presented under this policy topic align with HUD's
Strategic Goal 1: Support for underserved communities, through which HUD seeks to fortify support for
underserved communities and support equitable community development for all individuals residing in
the United States. The questions build the evidence base on HUD's programs and initiatives designed to
foster housing and neighborhood revitalization, improved quality of life, and economic development.
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy most effectively support equitable community
development, place-building, and quality of life improvements in American communities?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - What were the outcomes of the Choice Neighborhoods program for both residents
and the communities in which it was implemented?
Choice Neighborhoods Evaluation - The Choice Neighborhoods program was created in 2010 to support
reinvestment in distressed neighborhoods with deteriorating public or HUD-assisted housing. HUD has
an ongoing evaluation of Choice Neighborhoods (scheduled to be completed in 2023) that focuses
primarily on the five sites that received grants in the first round of funding. A total of 40 grants for nearly
$1.2 billion have been awarded and many of those grants have completed their primary redevelopment
activities. This new study of Choice Neighborhoods, either as an expansion of the existing evaluation or
one including additional communities, would examine more comprehensively the effects of the program
over a longer time period. Topics for evaluation would include the extent to which: the HUD-assisted
housing and surrounding neighborhood substantially improved; the redevelopment activities were
associated with positive fair housing outcomes for the neighborhoods, baseline residents, and other
low-income residents, such as desegregation, increased accessible housing, or increase in equitable
access to opportunity for residents; baseline residents benefited from the redevelopment and in what
ways (e.g., economic, educational, health); baseline residents returned after redevelopment, moved
9
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
with vouchers, or left assistance; and the redevelopment created and preserved affordable housing
opportunities for other low-income residents.
How effective are CDBG economic development activities across different community types and
program approaches?
Use of CDBG for Economic Development - The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program-
including its loan guarantee component, Section 108-is designed to provide its state and local
government grantees with substantial discretion and flexibility in using the resources to address local
needs. Such flexibility limits the feasibility and usefulness of national program evaluations. Nevertheless,
a study of the use of CDBG funds across different communities and of the effectiveness of various
strategies could highlight best practices that could help HUD and local partners administer the program
more equitably and effectively in different contexts. This research could use longitudinal analysis of
CDBG spending activity in relation to business starts and business longevity, using DUNS data in CPD's
Integrated Disbursement Information System (IDIS) database. The analysis could explore topics such as:
which of the CDBG economic development interventions have the most transformative impact on a
neighborhood or commercial corridor, or what is the long-term survival rate for businesses supported by
CDBG activities, or what is the overall impact on business success in areas with CDBG spending. IDIS data
are essential for this research and could be combined with other national and local datasets.
To what extent does CDBG investment benefit low- and moderate-income persons and
individuals who are members of protected class groups or underserved communities?
Equity in the CDBG Program - The CDBG program is meant to serve low-and moderate-income
communities but the actual distribution of funds or benefits to these two sets of households has not
been evaluated. This study could begin by comparing the ratio of CDBG spending targeted to low-
income or moderate-income households to the ratio of total low-income and moderate-income
households in a grantee's jurisdiction. This analysis should be replicated for different definitions of
disadvantaged and underserved communities, including persons of color, individuals with disabilities,
and the other protected classes under fair housing and civil rights laws; and may also be replicated for
persons who live in rural areas, and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or
inequality. Discrepancies between the spending ratio and the population ratio could prompt further
analysis of why the activities are not equitably distributed, what HUD or its grantees could do to remove
barriers to more equitable distribution and the impact of that inequity. Further analysis could consider
discrepancies in need among communities due to past disinvestment or other factors and whether
benefits are being distributed in proportion to each community's respective needs.
How are CDBG grantees using the Section 108 loan guarantee program to support innovative
affordable housing and economic development models?
Financing Affordable Housing and Economic Development - The Section 108 Loan Guarantee Program
provides communities with a source of low-cost, long-term financing for economic and community
development projects. The program allows local governments to leverage portions of their CDBG funds
into federally guaranteed loans large enough to pursue physical and economic revitalization projects
capable of redeveloping entire neighborhoods. HUD produced a study of the program in 2012
10
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
(Econometrica, 2012). To further explore how this program can serve as a platform for innovative
affordability models, this project could produce case studies on the use of Section 108 in developing
affordable and accessible manufactured housing and shared equity housing and in supporting small
businesses, workforce training, and other economic development activities.
How can HUD support and increase access to healthy environments in communities through
assets connected to place-based investments?
Place-based Investments as a Platform for Opportunity - Over the past decade there has been increased
interest in the concept of opportunity areas, which may provide greater benefits based on the presence
of various necessities or amenities sometimes referred to as "opportunity assets." Various definitions
and methodological approaches have been explored for both opportunity areas and opportunity assets,
which may differ depending on household types or needs to be addressed. As an initial matter, a
research project would conduct a literature review and a review of available data sources to measure
different types of opportunity assets. Research in more depth would consider to what extent existing
HUD programs contribute to or provide greater access to various opportunity assets, including health
care, access to jobs, transportation, schools or other key assets. HUD programs that could be considered
include CDBG, Section 108, Choice Neighborhoods, or other place-based investments, as well as the
Housing Choice Voucher program and other mobility approaches. Providing research-based evidence
can help inform a wide variety of public policy issues, including both mobility and place-based
approaches.
To what extent can technical assistance build capacity and improve financial management of
distressed local governments?
Distressed Cities Technical Assistance Evaluation - Technical assistance is a key component of HUD's
work. Distressed Cities Technical Assistance (DCTA) is a relatively new program created to provide
support to smaller towns and cities that often do not have the opportunity or capacity to access HUD's
programs. Given DCTA's focus on these smaller places, evaluating its impact might provide insight into
how HUD could expand its programs to smaller jurisdictions. An evaluation would identify desired
outcomes from the individual TA engagements and evaluate whether and to what extent those
outcomes were achieved. Two particular elements of the program could be considered of special
interest: the program's central focus on increasing financial management capacity and how long any
increase in the TA recipient's capacity to manage their finances is maintained after the engagement has
ended.
How effective are homeowner rehabilitation programs at improving individual quality of life and
what effect do they have on neighborhood quality?
Home Rehab Study - This research would examine the effectiveness of homeowner rehabilitation
subsidies flowing through the HOME Investment Partnerships program (HOME), the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA)-insured Section 203k mortgage program, and any other similar proposed
programs. HOME programs operated by participating jurisdictions may finance rehabilitation work
through grants or through loans. FHA 203k loans, whether providing Standard financing for major
structural work or Limited financing for less intensive rehabilitation, increase the balance of the
11
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
mortgage loan by the additional amount needed. This study would examine the effects of these
programs for homeowners, including variations by owner characteristics, program outcomes related to
property values, housing quality, quality of life, and accessibility for occupants with disabilities, and
variations associated with program incentives in Opportunity Zones (OZs) where the 203k Limited loan
limit is increased to $50,000, rather than $35,000 outside of OZs.
How much affordable housing is created within Opportunity Zones, and what is the broader
change in housing affordability in those areas?
Affordable Housing Development in Opportunity Zones - Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017,
Qualified Opportunity Funds can benefit from capital gains tax advantages for investments in designated
Opportunity Zones. Such equity investments can complement diverse financing arrangements to
generate affordable multifamily housing in OZs: investing in Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)
developments; taking advantage of FHA fee reductions for mortgage insurance; using state and local
incentives for affordable housing development in OZs; and participating in the government-sponsored
enterprises' mission-driven priorities for multifamily loan purchases (e.g., properties with 25 percent of
units reserved for households below 60 percent of area median income). This study of OZ housing
production would examine rates and types of housing development in a sample of OZs relative to
comparison areas and identify the mix of financing mechanisms used, with a particular focus on other
affordable housing capital programs. The local-level focus could also include analysis of broader
outcomes, including market dynamics in the existing housing stock that is not being directly financed in
connection with an Opportunity Fund. In addition, the research could consider the demographic
composition of the OZs in which affordable housing has been produced in conjunction with whether the
OZ designation accompanied any demographic change. The research could also consider the access to
opportunity, or lack thereof, available to residents of the newly produced affordable housing and
whether the OZ designation was associated with any improvements to such access. The research would
assess the extent to which the tax subsidy for OZ investments is achieving public purposes and inform
policy decisions about how to enhance the program's benefits.
What has been the impact of the HOPE VI Urban Revitalization program over 20 years?
Long-Term Evaluation of HOPE VI - Between 1993 and 2010, the HOPE VI program demolished
approximately 98,000 public housing units and produced approximately 97,000 mixed-income units.
Research on the long-term effects of HOPE VI has been limited. HUD published An Historical and
Baseline Assessment of HOPE VI (Abt Associates, 1996) and an Interim Assessment of HOPE VI (Holin et
al., 2003), but these studies focused on only a few sites and HUD never published a long-term follow-up.
A 2009 book From Despair to Hope presented a series of articles on HOPE VI (Cisneros and Engdahl,
2009) and a 2016 HUD report HOPE VI Data Compilation and Analysis (Gress et al., 2016) summarized
characteristics of units demolished and constructed through HOPE VI. However, none of these studies
have provided conclusive evidence on key topics, such as: how HOPE VI affected outcomes for residents
(including those present at baseline and those who moved in after redevelopment); whether HOPE VI
grants significantly improved neighborhoods relative to a compelling counterfactual; and the extent to
which any improvements from HOPE VI have been sustained over the long term (20 years since grants
12
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
were made). This study would strive to answer those questions using a mixed methods approach similar
to the approach HUD is currently using to evaluate HOPE VI's successor program, Choice Neighborhoods.
What are the personal reasons, outcomes, and destinations of households who leave gentrifying
neighborhoods? What motivations and perceptions of neighborhood change influence the
choices of leavers and stayers?
Outcomes and Decisions of Tenants in Neighborhoods Experiencing Redevelopment - Using restricted
administrative data on Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program participants, Ellen and Torrats-Espinosa
(2016) found that, in metropolitan areas where rents are increasing more rapidly, voucher households
tend to move more frequently to other neighborhoods, experience higher rent burdens, and become
more spatially concentrated, but the poverty rate in their neighborhoods where they live after these
moves tends to decrease. PD&R published the Displacement of Lower Income Families in Urban Areas
Report (HUD-PD&R, 2018) in response to the request by House and Senate Appropriations committees
for HUD to examine the effects of rapidly rising rents in urban areas across the nation and avoid
displacement. This research could use HCV program administrative data and feedback from public
housing agencies to study the motivations, positive and negative outcomes, and destinations of
households leaving neighborhoods experiencing redevelopment. For this study, the research team
would build on existing analysis of HCV administrative data by conducting site visits in metropolitan
areas that have experienced significant rent increases. The research team would interview HCV program
participants from neighborhoods with rising rents to ascertain the motivations and perceptions that
influenced their decisions to remain in or leave the neighborhood. The study would examine patterns or
disparities in the HCV program participants' motivations, outcomes, or destinations, as well as any
related effects of historic or present discrimination.
What are the housing needs of agricultural workers?
Farmworker Housing Access and Quality - People who work in agriculture, including seasonal, migrant
farmworkers and those who live in communities permanently, face a range of barriers to safe, adequate,
and affordable housing. In coordination with other federal stakeholders, such as the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA), the U.S. Census Bureau, and the U.S. Departments of Labor and Interior, this
research effort could explore options for adding questions to existing surveys to learn more about the
affordability, availability, and quality of housing for farmworkers, agricultural areas, and people living in
rural communities. The research could also identify innovative models for providing temporary and
permanent housing for farmworkers and in heavily agricultural communities to highlight best practices
of federal, state, and local policy makers.
Core Housing Programs
HUD funds three main types of deep-subsidy rental assistance programs to provide housing stability for
very low-income households. Public housing agencies (PHAs) administer public housing and the tenant-
based HCV program, and private housing providers operate Project-based Rental Assistance (PBRA) and
other types of assisted multifamily programs. The unmet need for housing assistance is great, so it is
crucial for the Department to continually build evidence to make these programs more cost-effective,
serve more of the unmet needs, and ensure that program participation is beneficial during the relatively
13
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
short stays of most assisted households. The research questions presented under this policy topic align
with HUD's strategic Goal 2: Ensure access to and increase production of affordable housing, through
which HUD seeks to increase access to safe, stable, accessible, and affordable housing for those at high
risk of homelessness or housing instability, and to ensure that the services and supports available to
families receiving HUD assistance are flexible enough to meet families' varied needs and build on family
strengths.
Foundational Learning Question: How can HUD most effectively meet needs for high-quality, rent-
assisted housing that supports housing security and economic advancement?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - What are the most effective ways of engaging with and attracting landlords to the
voucher program?
Moving To Work (MTW) Demonstration Program Evaluation: Landlord Incentives Cohort - Congress has
authorized HUD to expand the MTW Demonstration program to 100 new housing authorities, including
at least 50 smaller PHAs. Some existing MTW PHAs have used the MTW flexibility to offer different types
of incentives to landlords to improve landlord participation and expand choice in housing for HCV
tenants. Expansion agencies in this cohort will implement activities such as increased payment
standards, up to one month of contract rent to new HCV landlords, and modified inspection schedules.
The research will begin in fiscal year 2022 and will rely on a mix of existing administrative data and new
data collections to measure landlords' willingness to participate in the voucher program. This research is
critical to ensuring HUD's largest and still growing program can ensure there is an adequate supply of
willing landlords offering quality housing.
What would change if tenant-based rental assistance programs made payments directly to
tenants?
Direct Rental Subsidy Demonstration - In the 1970s, HUD ran the Experimental Housing Allowance
Program (EHAP) to test tenant-based housing subsidies, informing the design of the Housing Choice
Voucher program. A notable feature of EHAP, which was not adopted by the HCV program, is that the
subsidy was paid directly to the assisted household rather than directly to the landlord. Today, landlord
participation is one of the biggest challenges for the HCV program. Approximately 40 percent of
households that receive a voucher fail to use it, often because they can't find a landlord who will accept
the voucher. In the HCV program, the tenant pays rent to the landlord that is roughly equivalent to 30
percent of their household income and the PHA pays the landlord the difference between the unit's
total rent cost and what the tenant pays. If the PHA paid the subsidy to the tenant, and the tenant then
paid the entire rent to the landlord-similar to the EHAP model-landlords might be more willing to
accept subsidized tenants as they would have less need to interact with a third party, the PHA. This
study would use a randomized controlled trial to compare outcomes for households that receive their
rental subsidy directly from the PHA and households participating in the regular HCV program. Specific
features of the direct rental subsidy would require further discussion; it could retain many features of
the HCV program (inspections, income-based subsidy level, payment standards to cap the subsidy) or it
could be more like a flexible cash transfer. Testing a more flexible cash-like subsidy would help to inform
14
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
debates around cash assistance programs (such as a guaranteed basic income) and how such programs
affect housing outcomes. For example, it may be that recipients of cash assistance have fewer financial
hardships, but recipients of regular housing vouchers have higher quality housing. This study would
provide important evidence to inform the future of housing policy and anti-poverty policy more broadly.
What would it take to improve accessibility in the federally assisted housing stock, including
public housing and privately owned multifamily housing?
Assisted Housing Accessibility Study - More than half of all tenants in public housing and in privately
owned subsidized housing either have a mobility disability or are age 65 or older. There are five times
more tenants with mobility disabilities living in public housing than there are accessible units available.
In addition, twice as many tenants with mobility disabilities live in privately owned subsidized housing
than in public housing, and there is little data on the accessibility of the privately owned subsidized
housing stock. Federal nondiscrimination and accessibility laws lay out accessibility standards for
housing. However, more than half of the assisted housing stock was constructed prior to the enactment
of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 504) and HUD's Section 504 implementing
requirements, which apply to recipients of federal financial assistance and include physical accessibility
requirements for federally assisted housing. In addition, the vast majority of multifamily housing was
constructed prior to the Fair Housing Act. Titles II or III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) may
also apply. There are no specific federal grant programs or appropriations for the specific purpose of
making an entire affordable housing stock accessible. This research would conduct two phases of data
collection. In the first phase, the study would collect data on the accessibility of public and subsidized
housing and on the specific accessibility features needed by tenants through one of two means: (a) a
survey of developments and residents or (b) a data matching project. As part of the first phase, the study
would also analyze how accessibility affects the propensity of residents with disabilities and limitations
to leave HUD-assisted housing. In the second phase, the study team would conduct in-person physical
inspections of a sample of developments to verify the results of the survey and estimate the cost of
making accessibility modifications. Given of the high cost of physical inspections, the second phase of
the project could be combined with a broader capital needs assessment of public housing for cost
efficiency.
How does housing quality affect assisted housing tenure, employment, health, and quality of life
outcomes of public housing and HCV tenants?
Effects of Housing Quality - Public and assisted multifamily housing is found with a broad range of
physical conditions. Housing quality problems, including accessibility barriers, may result from age of the
stock, obsolescence, and inadequate funding for capital needs through grants (public housing) or rental
reserves (multifamily housing). Inadequate housing quality influences tenant decisions to remain
assisted or leave the programs and has potential to affect tenant health, employment, and quality of life.
This study would link project- and unit-level Real Estate Assessment Center (REAC) physical inspection
data with data on outcomes for assisted households to produce national summary-level analyses of
associations between housing conditions (including programs and building types) and tenant outcomes.
Linkage with National Directory of New Hires (NDNH) data could support analysis of employment
outcomes. Linkage with the American Housing Survey, including Healthy Homes modules, could support
15
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
analyses of household demographics, tenant-reported housing and neighborhood conditions, and other
tenant outcomes. Linkages to national health surveys or Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) data could help explore tenant health outcomes.
What are the tenant, neighborhood, and PHA outcomes associated with the implementation of
Small Area FMRs?
Small Area FMR Implementation - Small Area Fair Market Rents (SAFMRs) provide PHAs managing the
HCV program the authority to (1) increase payment standards in neighborhoods of opportunity and (2)
reduce payment standards in less costly sections of a metropolitan area. HUD launched the SAFMR
Demonstration in 2012 at five PHAs. A rigorous evaluation of the demonstration, completed in 2018,
found positive results for the five participating PHAs (Dastrup et al., 2018). In 2016, HUD published the
final SAFMR rule, requiring PHAs operating in 24 metropolitan areas to use SAFMRs and requiring HUD
to make SAFMR designations every five years. This study would provide an expanded evaluation of
tenant, PHA, and neighborhood outcomes among the 200+ PHAs currently operating using SAFMRs. The
study could include research on families' search strategies and motivations for moving using SAFMRs, a
special focus on neighborhoods where the SAFMR is below the metropolitan-area-wide fair market rent
(FMR), research on landlord acceptance of SAFMRs, and a study of PHA administrative and subsidy costs.
The study would contribute substantially to the knowledge base on what has become a critical policy
lever for the HCV program.
What are the barriers to applying for federal housing assistance, especially for individuals who
are members of protected class groups or underserved communities, and would tools that
facilitate applying for housing assistance address them?
Housing Resource Locator Pilot - People seeking housing assistance often cannot rely on their local
Housing Authority alone to provide access to affordable housing. Local affordable housing programs,
other housing authorities in a community, and individual multifamily properties commonly all have
different application portals, making it difficult to know whether and where subsidized units might be
available. This research would conduct an environmental scan to document the barriers to applying to
federal housing assistance across the country and whether and how the barriers contribute to inequities
in access to programs. The environmental scan would likely include a literature review, analysis of
existing administrative data, and interviews or focus groups with diverse groups of people eligible to
apply for federal housing assistance. A second phase of the research could design a pilot project to
create local or state-level eligibility and application windows that provide a one-stop-shop for people to
seek housing assistance. HUD has an existing tool, the Housing Resource Locator, which HUD plans to
enhance to make it more friendly and relevant and which could be part of the pilot. If feasible and
effective at reducing barriers, the study could then consider how to bring the pilot to scale.
What is the pattern and distribution of voucher portability in the Housing Choice Voucher
Program?
Documenting Voucher Portability - Portability of vouchers has long been a vexing issue for the HCV
program because of the costs and complexities of administering and absorbing assisted households who
"port in" from other areas, the costs on the originating PHA when a tenant "ports out" to a higher cost
16
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
area, and the desire to preserve family choice and mobility in the HCV program. This project would
conduct case studies of nine PHAs that have high rates of portability (both origination and destination
PHAs). The findings would be used to design survey questions for a larger sample of PHAs with above-
average portability rates and an analysis of administrative data to examine PHA program operational
and cost outcomes as well as tenant outcomes in terms of pre-and post-portability neighborhood
characteristics (including economic opportunity and minority concentration) and earned income. The
study should consider what barriers porting tenants face in relocating to well-resourced areas of
opportunity. This work would help HUD understand the pattern and distribution of voucher portability,
the impact of portability on the origination and destination PHAs, and potential policy levers that HUD
might consider to support porting families and empower smaller PHAs to serve families in their
community. The study should highlight portability policies, including those used by regional PHA
consortia, that seem to be more effective, with the long-term objective of proposing a portability
demonstration to test the impact of different promising strategies.
How can HUD better support students in post-secondary education who are at risk of housing
insecurity and homelessness?
Evaluation of the College Housing Assistance Program model - Homelessness and housing insecurity
among students are reported by many four-year colleges and community colleges, with foreseeable
negative impacts on degree completion and student health and wellbeing. Particularly among
community colleges, many students do not fit the mold of a traditional student: these students are often
older, have children, and have jobs or seek employment while attending college. An ongoing PD&R
partnership grant is studying the implementation and impacts of a voucher program for homeless and
near-homeless college students. Known as CHAP, this program is a partnership between the Tacoma
Housing Authority and the Tacoma Community College. The housing authority uses its flexibilities as an
MTW site to offer vouchers for the students, and the community college provides outreach and case
management for students. The study would replicate this effort in a larger number of sites and
communities, either through MTW authority given to a select group of PHAs or through innovative
partnerships with other schools and service providers, in order to learn more about how this approach
could work at scale. An outcomes evaluation could look at students' experience of barriers when
attempting to find housing, such as landlord discrimination, administrative burden, and finding housing,
along with impacts of the housing assistance on students' academic outcomes, health, and economic
security.
What are the pros and cons of updating utility allowances through energy consumption
modeling rather than relying on actual utility data in multifamily properties?
Utility Allowance Modeling - HUD requires multifamily owners and agents to analyze utility consumption
data from their properties periodically to determine tenant utility allowances. The process by which
owners collect tenant bills can be time consuming and difficult. A HUD Utility Schedule Model developed
in recent years offers a starting point for a more streamlined process that does not require collecting
tenant bills. This study would explore whether energy consumption modeling for existing properties
17
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
could be as accurate as collecting tenant utility bills and would compare the administrative cost of the
two approaches.
How do energy standards affect the long-term viability of RAD conversions?
Energy Efficiency in the RAD program - In 2012, Congress authorized the Rental Assistance
Demonstration (RAD) to serve as an effective approach to meet the capital improvement needs of the
public housing stock. Under RAD, PHA-owned properties convert to Section 8 rental assistance, which
provides project-based rental assistance or project-based voucher assistance over long-term contracts.
These commitments to subsidize tenant rents can serve as a reliable income stream to attract long-term
debt and equity from the syndication of LIHTC tax credits. Capital secured in conjunction with a RAD
conversion allows the owner to upgrade facilities and reduce backlogs of unfunded capital
improvements. RAD requires projects undertaking rehabilitation with energy efficiency and health
upgrades to use the most energy- and water-efficient options that are financially feasible and that are
found to be cost-effective. Some states also may establish preferences or requirements for energy
efficiency in their Qualified Allocation Plans (QAPs) for awarding LIHTC tax incentives. This study would
evaluate RAD projects to assess energy and financial performance, describing energy-related
improvements and their relationship to the "financially feasible" and "cost effective" criteria and, to the
extent reliable data are available, measuring post-conversion energy performance against previous
energy use.
How are PHAs implementing the Project-Based Voucher program?
State of the PBV Program - The Project-Based Voucher (PBV) program, a component of the HCV
program, provides subsidies, through PHAs, to private owners of rental housing for low-income
households that are associated with the building (the "project"). The program has grown from 24,000
units in 2015 to approximately 270,000 units in 2021. The PBV portfolio is expected to grow even more
with the ongoing conversion of up to 455,000 public housing units to project-based assistance under the
Congressionally authorized Rental Assistance Demonstration. As of November 2021, there were
approximately 90,000 RAD-converted PBV units. 9 HUD has limited data on PBV properties and on the
adequacy of its property and asset management practices where PHAs maintain effective control and
ownership of the property. HUD is conducting an evaluation of the RAD program that includes an
assessment of the adequacy of asset management practices of RAD-PBV properties relative to industry
best practices, but the evaluation does not include the majority of PBV properties (which are not part of
RAD conversions) and does not include an assessment of property management practices. This research
project would use available data on PBV properties to provide a picture of the PBV portfolio and conduct
interviews with a sample of PHAs and property owners to understand the adequacy of asset and
property management practices of non-RAD PBV properties. The study would employ a mixed-methods
research approach that combines descriptive analysis of administrative and publicly available data for
PBV properties and a qualitative analysis of PBV asset and property management approaches. This
financial component of the work would require HUD to establish an internal working group focusing on
9 Data on the HCV program, including PBV units, is available at
https://www.hud.gov/program offices/public indian housing/programs/hcv/dashboard.
18
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
real estate and asset management practices. This component would review best practices, prior
research, and HUD's current asset management requirements, procedures, and systems, and conduct
interviews with experts and HUD's real estate and asset management staff. The study is needed to
provide basic information on the PBV portfolio and help inform whether HUD needs to apply additional
regulations to collect additional data on, and perform more extensive monitoring of, the program.
Is the Project-Based Voucher program benefiting HUD's target populations and do underserved
communities have equitable access to the program?
Access and Equity in the PBV program - The Housing Opportunity Through Modernization Act (HOTMA)
of 2016 included many provisions that expanded the portfolio of PBVs, by allowing non-MTW PHAs to
(1) exceed the 20-percent limit of PBVs within their HCV programs (for example, PBVs tied to special
populations or in low-poverty areas), and (2) exclude PBV units from the limit (for example, RAD and
HUD-VASH PBVs). As a result, as of March 2020, 154 of the 672 non-MTW PHAs that had PBV units
exceeded the 20-percent limit, including 85 PHAs that had 30 percent or more of PBV units in their HCV
program. There is concern that the large share of PBV units in some PHAs can limit access to housing
assistance for families that do not fit the unit characteristics or service conditions required for many PBV
units. This research project would analyze administrative data and conduct case studies in PHAs with a
large share of PBVs to understand the possible mismatch between PBV units (size, location, service
requirement, physical accessibility) and characteristics of households with worst-case needs for housing
assistance in the area, and the equity implications of such a mismatch. The study would employ a mixed-
methods research approach using HUD administrative data and interviews with PHAs, property owners,
and resident organizations in a selected number of sites. The study is needed to understand which
household types benefit from the expansion of PBVs and whether the program is consistent with HUD's
goals for prioritizing equity.
What are the long-term social and economic outcomes of persons who have exited public and
assisted housing?
Outcomes of Exiters - Using the American Community Survey (ACS), the American Housing Survey (AHS),
and HUD administrative data. This project would link HUD administrative data with Census survey data
in order to understand the long term social and economic trajectories of individuals and households that
receive housing assistance at some point in their life cycle. By cross-walking Census survey dates with
program participation episodes as recorded in HUD's administrative data, researchers would be able to
identify three comparison groups: (1) those who were surveyed prior to receiving assistance, (2) those
receiving HUD assistance at the time of the survey, and (3) those who had received assistance but were
no longer receiving assistance when surveyed. This project would allow HUD to better understand the
life cycles of HUD-assisted tenants and would facilitate the development of a new data product for the
research community.
Disaster Recovery, Energy, and Climate Change
Recent decades have brought major increases in the frequency, geographic diversity, and costs of
declared disasters. HUD's Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funds
have played a critical role in facilitating community recovery, and HUD is collaborating with the Federal
19
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to increase emphasis on resilience, mitigation, and equitable
disaster preparedness, response, and recovery. Accelerating climate change has created urgency for
evidence-informed improvements to disaster policy, energy efficiency, and other resilience and
sustainability initiatives. The research questions under this policy topic align with HUD's strategic Goal 4:
Advance sustainable communities, where HUD recognizes that health, climate resilience, environmental
justice, and energy efficiency are central to the Department's mission and need to be embedded across
HUD programs.
Foundational Question: How can federal policy and funding best support disaster recovery, climate
resilience, and sustainability and strengthen environmental justice?
Top Priority - Does HUD need to modify the CDBG-DR allocation process to account for new
needs related to climate change?
Accounting for Climate Change Adaptation in CDBG-DR Allocations - HUD allocates CDBG-DR funds using
a standardized formula that incorporates information about disaster impact, hazard insurance,
household incomes, and unmet needs. HUD continuously updates the allocation formula to ensure that
grant funds across the country are equitably distributed. As climate change affects the severity and
frequency of natural hazards such as extreme flooding, heat, and wildfire, the federal government,
states, and communities are increasingly deploying climate change adaptation and risk reduction
strategies as part of their disaster recovery plans to reduce future impacts, which has fundamentally
changed the nature and costs of the recovery process. HUD has incorporated "resilience needs" into
previous CDBG-DR allocations for unmet disaster recovery needs and has made CDBG-Mitigation (CDBG-
MIT) grants to increase resilience by mitigating natural hazards. However, HUD needs better information
about post-disaster adaptation needs and the costs of meeting them to understand whether and how to
update the allocation formula to the extent permitted by appropriations acts that make the funds
available. This research would conduct literature reviews and survey climate experts and practitioners
administering disaster recovery plans to gather information about the needs and costs of climate change
adaptation and resilience strategies incorporated into disaster recovery plans. Researchers could also
collect cost data on existing projects and programs that could be factored into HUD's CDBG-DR and
CDBG-MIT allocation formulas in order to further advance equity in the provision of grant funds. Since
current information is limited, the results of this study would inform the extent to which climate change
needs should be incorporated into allocations and what alternatives might exist for meeting such needs.
How do the impacts, costs, and resulting needs of slow-onset disasters compare with those of
declared disasters, and what are implications for slow-onset disaster declarations, recovery aid
programs, and HUD allocation formulas?
Examination of Impacts of Slow-Onset Disasters - HUD allocates CDBG-DR grants only for the most
impacted and distressed areas resulting from major Presidentially declared disasters when resources
from other public and private sources are not enough to meet the needs of the community. Such
disasters are typically short term in nature, such as extreme weather events like severe storms,
hurricanes, blizzards, floods, earthquakes, or wildfires that result in enough damage to qualify as "most
impacted and distressed" within a given time period (typically, a one-year period). Research suggests
20
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
that climate change is causing a variety of extreme environmental changes and slow-onset hazards that
result in enormous direct and indirect losses of property, property value, economic activity, livelihoods,
public health, and human lives over a longer period of time. Examples of slow onset disasters include
drought, permafrost melt, sea-level rise, and coastal inundation. Despite the devastating effects of slow-
onset disasters, they are not typically declared major disasters by the President under federal authorities
and the federal government is often limited in its ability to provide meaningful disaster aid in this
context. This research would examine the impacts of slow-onset disasters on communities and compare
the losses associated with slow-onset disasters to those associated with Presidentially declared major
disasters. The research would also investigate legislative frameworks describing the federal
government's role following major disasters in order to assess the implications of declarations of slow-
onset disasters, federal recovery aid programs allocated by FEMA and SBA, and HUD CDBG-DR
allocations. By exploring the needs that result from slow-onset disasters, the study could inform
decisions about the role that HUD and other federal agencies could play in mitigation and recovery.
What HUD-assisted properties are repeatedly harmed by or at increasing risk of disasters and
what is the cost to HUD? What are risks to HUD-assisted and other vulnerable populations?
Estimating Climate Risk and Losses of HUD Assets - HUD increases the affordability of housing across the
nation with public investments ranging from significant annual investments for public housing units to
basic mortgage insurance for single-family properties. Owners of HUD-assisted properties may be
uninsured or underinsured for flood or wildfire risk, which increases financial risk to HUD and risks the
loss of affordable housing to the communities in the event of a disaster. This study would determine the
flood and wildfire risk exposure of public housing and the multifamily housing portfolio. The research
would quantify the aggregate exposure at various geographic levels and analyze actual or modeled loss
data to determine and/or estimate previous and anticipated losses. The research would entail an
assessment of available risk data and other data that would be needed to institutionalize risk
assessment across HUD program offices. The research would also examine cost-effective approaches for
HUD risk management including property level mitigation and buyouts. Such an analysis would help HUD
understand the fiscal implications of natural hazard risk to its portfolios and provide evidence to support
a means of action. The results could inform potential strategies to address risks through physical
mitigation and other policies and permit HUD to establish priorities for targeted assistance to HUD
grantees. This type of data and risk assessment could also be applied more broadly to the general
population, especially groups with particular vulnerabilities to climate and disaster impacts, areas of
concentrated poverty, and the private housing market at large. Results of such assessments would
inform housing, community development policy and practices, and serve as a valuable tool for
developing risk reduction plans and strategies.
What enhancements to disaster-related data collection and data sharing between agencies are
needed to improve coordination and accelerated recovery?
Assessment of Federal Disaster Recovery and Benefits Data Sharing - Following a natural disaster,
individuals and communities must assemble resources from a variety of sources-personal savings,
assets, or loans; private insurance; charity; and government programs. Federal programs are typically
designed to fill in remaining gaps after other resources are exhausted, but federal agencies are often
21
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
uncoordinated and information that could streamline access to aid and the recovery process is not
available or easily shared across agencies or with local grantees. HUD's CDBG-DR funds are allocated
based on the unmet needs that remain after hazard insurance and other federal disaster aid from FEMA,
SBA, and Army Corps has been awarded. If CDBG-DR grantees had ready access to high-quality data on
unmet needs, the information could substantially accelerate the recovery process, support mitigation
efforts, reduce waste and fraud, ease the paperwork burden for survivors, and lead to more strategic,
equitable program design. HUD is negotiating a computer matching agreement to share data with FEMA
and is developing a tool known as the Disaster Recovery Data Portal (DRDP) to share data with CDBG-DR
grantees. This data enhancement project would follow completion of DRDP by engaging a research team
to conduct one or more case studies of how data can be used to support disaster recovery. The research
team would conduct a thorough review of the data sources and specific pieces of information that
CDBG-DR grantees require. The research team would work with a CDBG-DR grantee that had access to
HUD-FEMA data via DRDP to determine whether DRDP met the grantee's data needs. The research team
would discuss specific successes or shortcomings of DRDP and the HUD-FEMA matched data and
propose enhancements for HUD to pursue. The researchers also would explore other federal data
sources, such as environmental reviews, flood insurance claims, and FEMA inspections, that could
improve the efficacy of CDBG-DR funds and consider how to ensure the data sources are linked and
accessible to those who need them. Finally, the research team would use the case study to develop
guidance for other CDBG-DR grantees as they seek to utilize DRDP (or related federal data) to provide
for faster and more effective disaster recovery efforts.
How does the impact of CDBG-Disaster Recovery funding vary across communities, and how do
impacts vary with local capacity?
Assessing CDBG-DR Grantee Capacity - CDBG-DR funding is typically distributed to states and local
governments; the disaster areas, however, may be in smaller jurisdictions with limited capacity to spend
the grants quickly and effectively. States may elect to provide grant funds to municipalities or HUD can
provide grants directly to units of general local government and Indian tribes. These entities have
varying levels of capacity but there is little information about how disaster recovery outcomes vary
across communities with different capacity to manage the grants. The objective of this study would be
to assess the capacity level of CDBG-DR grantees and to analyze how capacity and related challenges or
strengths contribute to CDBG-DR recovery outcomes. The study would also attempt to disentangle
HUD's role in grantee capacity, answering such questions as: Does the statutory cap placed on
administrative funding hinder the recovery process of grantee communities? Is HUD assessing the right
factors in grantees as part of the financial and management capacity pre-award certifications? What
actions can HUD take before and during the execution of a CDBG-DR grant to address capacity
challenges and to promote more effective pre-and post-disaster planning and long-term resilience?
What are the demographic characteristics of the residents served by grantees facing capacity challenges,
and do capacity challenges impact whether funds equitably benefit underserved communities, including
protected class groups under fair housing and civil rights laws? How does the distribution of funds to
state governments versus units of general local government impact which residents and jurisdictions
22
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
benefit from the grant? Ultimately the research would provide evidence to support policy and
programmatic changes and would inform the deployment of technical assistance resources.
What are the outcomes of CDBG-Disaster Recovery buyout programs and are these programs
administered equitably?
Efficacy and Equity in Post-disaster Buyout Programs - HUD CDBG-DR grantees have funded nearly 5,000
buyouts of properties in high-risk areas in an effort to permanently remove structures from areas likely
to be impacted by natural hazards. Although this may be a cost-effective means of mitigating disaster
risk, downsides may include neighborhoods losing residents and property tax revenue and households
needing to relocate to new communities with unknown support systems, services, opportunities, and
natural hazard risks. Further, though most communities choose to fund buyout programs that are
voluntary, the lack of options for households following a disaster may limit real choice in relocating,
especially for uninsured, low-income, minority, or senior homeowners, raising questions about
inequitable access, limited choice in recovery options, and displacement. HUD does not collect detailed
systemic information about the outcomes of households and neighborhoods associated with buyout
programs. In order to better understand the efficacy of buyout programs in meeting their stated goals,
the research team would collect data from CDBG-DR grantees that have implemented buyout programs
and conduct interviews with program managers, staff, disaster recovery leadership, and program
participants. Using both primary data collected and secondary administrative data from HUD,
researchers would examine how communities decided to fund buyouts, what information they used to
design their program, what factors affect households' decisions to accept a buyout, what barriers to
participation were experienced by eligible households, what outcomes result from the program in
neighborhoods and for households, whether individuals and communities of different racial groups and
other protected classes equitably benefited from the program, and what the characteristics of the
neighborhoods are to which residents relocated (e.g. access to opportunity, racial concentration). The
results of the analysis could inform a set of principles and approaches to designing and implementing
buyout programs and policies so as to improve equity in access and outcomes and ensure
nondiscrimination throughout all programs.
Where do people go after a disaster?
Journey to Permanent Housing - The impacts of major disasters go beyond damage to property and
infrastructure and direct injury to persons. They can ripple through the lives of residents through
disruptions to housing and economic activity. Many residents experience housing instability that results
from impacts to their homes, which can have complex and varied effects on the socioeconomic well-
being of households as they try to make their way back to permanent housing. It is not uncommon for
survivors to transition through multiple temporary sheltering arrangements such as congregate facilities,
hotels and motels, or Temporary Transportable Housing Units (TTHU) and then to at least one direct
housing arrangement (lease and repair or TTHU), all before they end up in permanent housing. These
temporary housing situations can also be far from a household's pre-disaster community, adding to the
challenges of recovery of households that need community support and are attempting to return to
jobs, childcare, and schools. This research would seek to characterize households journey through
different types of housing arrangements, providing a clear and precise picture of post-disaster housing
23
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
instability and how post-disaster housing trajectories may be different for distinct groups, specifically
low-income and/or renter households. Researchers would gather data on number, type, and quality of
temporary housing situations; duration of temporary housing situations and overall housing
displacement; proximity of temporary housing situations from pre-disaster housing location; difference
in quality of temporary from pre-disaster housing location and overall quality of housing, and other
related data points that illustrate the housing instability of households before settling into permanent
housing. The research approach could draw on existing public and private data files, and/or use
qualitative interviewing and ethnographic methods to explore people's experiences in the wake of a
disaster.
What is the optimal level of flood insurance coverage for the FHA single-family mortgage
portfolio and how can flood insurance policies maximize coverage?
Optimizing flood insurance coverage requirements for the FHA single family mortgage portfolio - Current
FHA regulations require mortgagors to obtain and maintain National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
policies for properties located in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), also referred to as the 100-year
flood plain. Forthcoming rulemaking will allow consumers to purchase comparable private flood
coverage or NFIP policies. Although having flood insurance is one way to build more economic resiliency
in communities, it is unclear whether NFIP or options for private insurance provide adequate protection
for homeowners impacted by flooding. Recent floods highlight the issue of high uninsured or under-
insured losses. When flooding hit South Carolina in 2015, about 90 percent of insurance policies were
concentrated at the coast, but the flood damage occurred primarily inland where few residents were
insured. The majority of people hit by Hurricane Harvey in 2017 were not in high-risk flood zones. Even
homeowners with an NFIP insurance policy can be paid a maximum of only $250,000 under the
program, which is often insufficient to cover major destruction caused by flooding. This study would
evaluate the costs in time and money of uninsured and underinsured FHA-insured mortgagors and
attempt to develop an "optimal" level of insurance coverage for FHA-insured mortgages, comparing
costs of insurance against likelihood of flood damage and destruction over a 30-year return period. The
research would answer the question of whether existing NFIP and private insurance policies offer
optimal coverage for homeowners and would provide guidance on how to design insurance
requirements such that compliance would minimize costs and maximize benefits to HUD and
homeowners at high risk of flooding.
Are current building efficiency, safety and resiliency codes for various types of housing
adequate?
Assessment of HUD and Vulnerable Building Efficiency, Safety, and Resiliency Codes - HUD programs
mandate that assisted properties meet an array of building standards and codes to ensure they are safe,
accessible, energy-efficient, and mitigate the risk of certain hazards. As HUD works to reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to combat climate change and reduce the risks of safety and
environmental hazards to its portfolio of assisted and vulnerable housing, the Department has identified
a need to assess the adequacy of its building standards and codes in meeting its latest climate change
goals. This study would catalogue all of HUD's existing building codes and standards related to safety,
GHG emissions/energy efficiency, and hazard mitigation, and would document how HUD mandates,
24
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
incentivizes, or encourages these standards/codes. The study could collect data on adoption of
standards/codes to examine whether the means of promoting the codes are effective. Other types of
vulnerable housing, such as tribal housing and older manufactured housing, may have lapsed or
inadequate efficiency, safety, and resiliency codes, and should be considered in this research. It could
also analyze existing quantitative data on code efficacy to examine whether the standard/code is
adequate at achieving climate change goals for individual homes and across HUD portfolios and specific
types on non-HUD housing, like manufactured housing. The research would ultimately provide policy
recommendations for HUD program offices and other housing groups for updating codes/standards to
meet new goals, consistent with applicable federal accessibility requirements, and for mandating,
incentivizing, or encouraging them to promote adoption in order to reduce GHG and hazard and safety
risk exposure to optimal levels.
How are climate change risk and disasters affecting mortgage performance, and what are
implications of including climate risk in underwriting procedures?
Climate and Natural Disaster Risks to mortgage performance and MMI Fund - The changing climate is
causing an increase in the number and severity of extreme weather events that can leave considerable
destruction in their wake, including loss of life and property and economic damage. These natural
disasters can place a significant burden on homeowners as mortgage payment and reconstruction costs
can trigger mortgage default. Performance data recorded by FHA, as well as previous HUD research,
show that default rates increase after natural disasters. Using data on FHA's Section 203(b) mortgage
insurance program, the National Mortgage Database, and disaster data from FEMA, this study would
evaluate the impact of natural disasters on the housing finance ecosystem, broadly, and loan
performance, including delinquency and default, specifically. In addition to examining mortgage
performance, the analysis would also examine the effect of flood insurance in loan performance and
reducing FHA losses. This study could be extended to include the role of FHA's loss mitigation actions in
preventing foreclosure and reducing losses. Acquiring appropriate FEMA data on NFIP policies and
claims as well as registrations to FEMA's Individuals and Households Program may be a significant
challenge for the study.
Fair Housing
The Fair Housing Act, as amended, prohibits discrimination in housing on the basis of race, color,
national origin, religion, sex, familial status, or disability. HUD's Office of Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity (FHEO) investigates fair housing complaints, conducts compliance reviews, ensures civil
rights in HUD programs, and administers fair housing grants. Technology-driver changes in advertising,
negotiations, and financing of housing pose new challenges for ensuring that housing is free from
discrimination. HUD also has jurisdiction for other federal civil rights laws including Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 109 of Title I of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972, the Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Architectural Barriers
Act. The research questions under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 1: Support
underserved communities, which includes Fair Housing enforcement activities to ensure that a person's
future is not limited by the zip code where they live and that a person's disability or sexual identity or
25
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
any other federally protected characteristic does not limit their access to housing and their ability to
fully live and participate in the community.
Foundational Learning Question: How can housing discrimination associated with online advertising,
social media, and finance be measured, investigated, and prevented?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - To what extent do people of color with disabilities seek redress related to their
disability?
Intersectionality of Disability Complaints - African American adults are the most likely to have a disability
(14 percent) followed by Non-Hispanic Whites (11 percent), Latinos (8 percent) and Asians (5 percent), a
disparity that results from a complex interaction of socioeconomic and demographic characteristics. 10
Similarly, African Americans in HUD-assisted housing have higher rates of reported disabilities than
other races/ethnicities. This research would explore whether proportionally, African Americans are less
likely to file disability-related housing discrimination complaints than persons of other races/ethnicities,
and if so, what factors account for the lower rate of housing discrimination complaints filed by African
Americans. The goal of this research is to identify and understand those factors to better inform
outreach and implementation of programs. The first phase of the research would include a qualitative
study inquiring whether disabled individuals would file a complaint if they were subjected to housing
discrimination, and why they would or would not do so. This initial qualitative study could expand into a
broader study incorporating quantitative data sources, including a nationally representative survey or
data analysis related to housing experiences among people of color with disabilities. An accompanying
scan of relevant literature focusing on the reasons why the number of disability-related complaints filed
might vary based on race/ethnicity would support the qualitative research and help inform any
quantitative study design, as well as drive potential corrective actions/programs.
How can research support HUD and community efforts to Affirmatively Further Fair Housing
(AFFH)?
Supporting AFFH With Research - The Fair Housing Act requires the HUD Secretary to "administer the
programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner to affirmatively to
further the policies [of the Fair Housing Act]."11 Research can assist with informing policy decisions and
grantee housing and community development activities through a variety of approaches. These can
include studying the ways in which HUD grant funds are used in local communities in various contexts
related to obligations to affirmatively further fair housing. For example, how well are HUD housing
programs contributing to improved mobility and housing opportunity outcomes, including for protected
class groups, or how well do HUD community development programs contribute to place-based
improvements or access to resident services, including in historically underserved communities?
 1 https://www.nationaldisabilityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/disability-race-poverty-in-america.pdf
11 42 U.S.C. §§ 3608
26
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
To what extent is there bias in home appraisals and automated valuations, and what are the fair
housing implications?
Identifying Bias in the Appraisal Process - The Interagency Task Force on Property Assessment Valuation
Equity (PAVE) was charged with identifying the extent, causes, and consequence of racial and other bias
in home appraisals. The work of the Task Force will likely extend beyond the submission of its Final
Report and include further exploration of research and policy topics. HUD can support this ongoing work
by using data collected and administered by FHA to conduct an analysis of potential racial bias as related
to several variables, including the appraised value, the contract price, the race of the borrower, the race
of the appraiser, and the use of automated valuation model (AVM) estimates. This work could be greatly
enhanced with an improvement of FHA's data management alongside inter-agency data sharing. Data
sharing agreements between HUD and agencies such as Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), USDA,
and Department of Veterans' Affairs (VA) would allow for a more robust analysis of potential bias in
every agency's loan underwriting activity.
Why do comparatively few fair housing complaints relate to the home sales process, and are
there ways to identify discriminatory practices such as steering?
Study of Discrimination in Home Sales Markets - Data collected by HUD's Office of FHEO include
relatively few fair housing complaints related to home sales, compared to the rental market. There are
several potential reasons for this, including the possibility of lower prevalence of discrimination in the
sales market or potential homebuyers using other means of recourse than filing a complaint with HUD,
or difficulties in detecting such discrimination. This study would explore the dynamics that could lead to
under-reporting of discrimination in sales markets and develop a strategy to identify discriminatory
practices in home sales process. This study would help HUD identify the prevalence of different types of
homes sales discrimination, such as steering, denials, and price differentials. The study team would also
develop a methodology and protocol for testing and measuring discrimination in the home sales
process. The study would include a geographic component, analyzing potential regional differences as
well as differences across different market types (such as central cities, suburbs, and rural areas),
demographics of those areas, and different housing types (e.g., condominiums, detached single-family
homes, townhomes).
What do early findings show about the experiences of voucher holders in jurisdictions with local
source of income discrimination ordinances?
Preventing Discrimination on the Basis of Source of Income - A growing number of states and local
governments have source of income discrimination bans ("SOI laws"). HUD's "A Pilot Study of Landlord
Acceptance of Housing Choice Vouchers" (Cunningham et al., 2018) found that landlords were more
likely to accept vouchers in places with SOI laws, but the study had a small sample and was not designed
to draw conclusions about the SOI laws themselves. This new project would explore the various SOI laws
around the country to better understand their effect on the ability of voucher-recipients to find available
units and successfully lease-up. The study would also consider the impact that SOI laws have on which
neighborhoods voucher-recipients secure units in. In addition, the study would analyze what barriers
remain in jurisdictions with SOI laws to voucher-recipients securing units, in general and in particular
27
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
neighborhoods. An important consideration is that SOI laws vary, especially in the extent to which they
are enforced; capturing that variation would be an important aspect of this study.
Can innovative housing discrimination study methodologies better detect and measure evidence
of discrimination in advertised units than in-person paired testing methods?
Study Comparing Methodologies for Measuring Housing Discrimination - Studies to detect and measure
housing discrimination have historically relied on in-person paired-testing methodologies. Recent
studies increasingly use email correspondence testing to measure discrimination in housing and other
markets (such as studies of discrimination in labor market hiring). Email correspondence testing is much
cheaper than in-person testing, but the measure of discrimination (disparate response to the home
seekers' emails) is much cruder than is possible with in-person testing. A 2013 PD&R-funded study of
discrimination against same-sex couples found no discrimination in email testing, but in-person paired-
testing found that same-sex couples would be charged higher rents and other fees than opposite-sex
couples (M. Davis and Company, 2013). During the COVID-19 pandemic, many landlords and property
managers increased the use of live video meetings, unit tours, and other comparable approaches in
order to maintain adequate social distancing. To the extent that these methods continue to be
employed post-pandemic, they may be another low-cost avenue through which to conduct paired-
testing. The evolution of technology and other developments in housing transactions and marketing
suggests the need for developing new methodologies for detecting and measuring housing
discrimination. PD&R has funded an HDS Innovative Methodology Project to identify and test new
methodologies for detecting and measuring housing discrimination. The current study would compare
the efficacy of paired-testing and email correspondence testing to the other promising methodologies
identified through PD&R's HDS Innovative Methodology Project.
Do home seekers with communication-related disabilities experience substantial barriers to
information in seeking rental units?
How Assistive Technologies can Act as Barriers to Housing Information - The most recent national study
of discrimination against people who are deaf or hearing-impaired found considerable discrimination at
the initial telephone inquiry about the advertised unit, but the level of discrimination appeared sensitive
to the type of assistive technology employed by deaf or hearing-impaired tester (Levy et al., 2015).
PD&R is in the process of developing new innovative methodologies for detecting and measuring
housing discrimination through its HDS Innovative Methodology Project. This study would employ
paired-testing or other methodologies to measure how the use of different assistive technologies affects
the amount of information about housing options that individuals who are deaf, have hearing
impairment, are blind or have low vision, or who have other communication-related disabilities, receive
about the rental housing they are seeking.
How are HUD's definitions of 'areas of minority concentration' and Site and Neighborhood
Standards shaping the development of new affordable housing?
Fair Housing Implications When Siting Assisted Housing - In its housing and community development
programs, HUD uses site and neighborhood standards and definitions of areas of minority concentration
to ensure that new housing is not built in areas of minority concentration that are not undergoing
28
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
revitalization and provides low-income minority households greater access to opportunity
neighborhoods. However, HUD has never studied whether the standards and definitions are achieving
their intended goals. In the RAD program, HUD is using a modified definition of an "area of minority
concentration." HUD's Site and Neighborhood Standards also apply to Choice Neighborhoods
developments, project-based voucher developments, Section 202 and 811, HOME, and public housing
mixed finance. The modified definition used in RAD made it easier to site HUD-assisted housing in
majority-minority areas. However, there is concern that this revised definition is permitting the
concentration of affordable housing in areas of minority concentration (even in housing markets where
there are neighborhoods that are not minority concentrated). This research would explore how further
revising the definition of an "area of minority concentration" and/or revising the exceptions that allow
for siting in areas of minority concentration could address this concern. The research would also
compare the different formulations of site and neighborhood standards that HUD uses and has used
previously to assess which best serve the goals of the site and neighborhood standards. HUD's site and
neighborhood standards are intended to ensure that new housing is built in areas outside of areas of
minority concentration, under the premise of promoting desegregation, expanding neighborhoods of
opportunities for low-income minority households, and assisting HUD and its grantees in complying with
their civil rights obligations, including the duty to affirmatively further fair housing, but HUD has never
studied whether the current site and neighborhood standards criteria achieve the intended goal. This
research would help inform possible changes to the definition of "minority concentration" and/or
adjustments to the two exceptions that allow for siting in a minority concentrated area. The research
would also consider the extent to which properties sited based on the exceptions have access to
opportunity and whether adjustments to the exceptions could better ensure that they do so.
What portion of the HUD-assisted rental housing continues to be non-compliant with applicable
federal accessibility requirements, including in entrances and common areas of a building?
Study of Accessibility of HUD Housing - The most recent national study of discrimination against
individuals who use wheelchairs found no disparate treatment of wheelchair users by property
managers, conditional on their being able to enter the building in the first place (Levy et al., 2015).
However, a large proportion of the multifamily stock was excluded from the research sample before
testing because the building was inaccessible. In this study, the research team would identify a
representative sample of developments across HUD programs, then send a survey agent to the
developments to test whether an individual using a wheelchair or with other mobility restrictions can
access leasing offices, units, and other areas of buildings from outside. The study would use the data
collected to estimate the portion of HUD developments that have inaccessible entrances because they
do not meet the minimum requirements of the accessibility laws. The study would compare the results
from these survey tests with more general measures of housing accessibility from the AHS, which in
29
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
2011 contained a module on housing accessibility (Bo' sher et al., 2015), and draw on survey data
sources to attempt to model the unmet need for accessible multifamily housing.
How effective are Fair Housing Initiatives Program agencies in providing fair housing education,
outreach, and investigations?
FHIP Implementation Study - The Fair Housing Initiatives Program (FHIP) provides grants to fair housing
enforcement organizations and non-profits to build capacity for a variety of fair housing activities
including investigations, testing and enforcement, and providing education and building public
awareness. This research would be a three-part study of FHIP to understand its activities and efficacies.
The first part would entail documenting the various types of FHIP projects and activities, as well as the
geographic coverage of the program and how FHIP grantees could collect and report better data. A
second phase could focus on the FHIP Education and Outreach Initiative component, which provides
funding for developing, implementing, carrying out, or coordinating education and outreach programs
designed to inform members of the public concerning their rights and obligations under the provisions
of fair housing laws. This phase of the study would assess the effectiveness of education and outreach
activities for decreasing discriminatory practices by landlords, real estate agents, and lenders and for
increasing awareness of such practices by tenants and home buyers. Finally, an evaluation of the FHIP
Private Enforcement Initiative component also could update previous work (HUD, 2011b) by assessing
the effectiveness of different testing methods used by private fair housing enforcement organizations.
Homeownership
Homeownership has long been viewed as an American dream, yet it remains out of reach for many low-
income households and historically underserved communities and sometimes fails to fulfill its promise
for these groups. The FHA provides mortgage insurance to increase the availability of mortgage finance
for first-time homebuyers and others. The Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) ensures
that private capital supports federal mortgage programs by guaranteeing mortgage-backed securities
backed by loans insured or guaranteed by FHA, USDA, PIH, and VA. HUD also supports homeownership
through formula grants to states and cities, downpayment assistance, housing counseling, and
collaboration with the Federal Housing Finance Administration. The research questions presented under
this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 3: Support homeownership opportunity, where HUD
seeks to promote wealth-building through homeownership by concentrating efforts on serving and
expanding credit access to individuals in underserved communities who experience barriers to
homeownership.
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy make first-time homeownership more available
and attainable to all Americans and more likely to result in housing stability and wealth-building for
underserved populations?
Priority Research Questions:
30
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Top Priority - How can equity in mortgage lending best be advanced, especially as algorithmic
decision making is becoming more prevalent?
Equity in Mortgage Lending in a Changing Market - More than 12 percent of Hispanic and 18 percent of
Black applicants for a mortgage to purchase a home were denied in 2020 compared to less than 7
percent of White applicants (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021). Some of these disparities
may be explained by differences in risk factors used in underwriting that are predictive of mortgage
delinquency, but unexplained differences may reflect disparate impact of algorithms and underwriting
policies or even discriminatory treatment by lenders. This study would use administrative data to
analyze racial disparities in automated underwriting system (AUS) recommendations and rates of loan
originations, as well as contrast these disparities with differences in subsequent loan performance. The
study would help identify where disparities in loan origination manifest, evaluate the extent to which
they reflect the "business necessity" of limiting risk, and what changes could lessen disparities without
increasing risk.
What have HUD programs done to close the homeownership gap, and what role does
homeowner equity play?
HUD's Role in Closing the Homeownership Gap - There is extensive research on the role the Home
Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) played in the 1930s in restricting mortgage financing for
predominantly minority neighborhoods and on the lasting repercussions of those restrictions (Park and
Quercia, 2019). There is also extensive research on current homeownership and wealth gaps between
people who are White and people of Color. These disparities are reinforcing as downpayment creates a
wealth barrier to homeownership, which itself is a strong factor in building wealth. FHA's low
downpayment requirements are a critical tool for facilitating homeownership for buyers with lower
incomes. This study would 1) examine the role that FHA policies and programs play in reducing the
homeownership gap and in creating sustainable homeownership experiences for buyers from historically
underserved communities; and 2) explore the role that FHA mortgage servicing and forbearance policies
have played in preserving homeownership among these underserved populations, including the effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic. Alongside data analysis, the study would include primary data collection via
interviews or surveys to document the experiences of homebuyers from underserved populations with
the home search and mortgage finance processes, challenges they faced keeping up with payments, and
the role of forbearance processes in their homeownership outcomes.
What are FHA's policy options and tradeoffs for advancing shared equity as a federal
homeownership strategy?
Advancing Shared Equity Models - In general, FHA offers limited support for shared equity models of
homeownership, largely based on the restrictions on resale that shared equity programs put in place to
preserve affordability. A large-scale study of the performance of loans made for the purchase of homes
in shared equity programs (as well as other characteristics, such as community stability and household
wealth creation) would allow FHA to properly evaluate whether increased support for shared equity
31
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
homeownership is appropriate. This study could also consider the expanded support for shared equity
from the housing government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) as part of their Duty to Serve goals.
Who has benefitted from pandemic forbearance programs?
Forbearance and Crisis Recovery - Like many homeowners, over the past 15 years FHA single-family
borrowers have faced challenges to their well-being and continued successful homeownership: the
Great Recession, natural disasters, and the COVID-19 pandemic. FHA has taken steps through its Loss
Mitigation programs to support homeowners through these hardships in ways that also seek to create
sustainable value for lenders and the FHA insurance funds. FHA offered Forbearance in response to the
pandemic to over 1.5 million households. Given this scale, the dynamic nature of loss mitigation activity,
and the anticipation of property destruction from the effects of climate change, loss mitigation
programs are a priority area to study. This study would examine the most recent loss mitigation
program-forbearance offered to households in response to the COVID-19 pandemic-an would
analyze the implementation and outcomes of the program from an equity perspective, focusing on
which households, including the demographics of those households, had access to and benefitted from
the program.
What are the implications for the housing finance system of differences in the composition of
mortgage-backed securities of GNMA versus those of the housing GSEs and their changes over
time?
Comparison of Mortgage-Backed Securities from Different Guarantors - Mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) are instruments that are secured by a package of mortgages. MBS backed by mortgages that have
federal insurance or guaranties from FHA, USDA, PIH, or VA may be guaranteed by GNMA. Conventional
mortgages are often securitized and guaranteed by the housing GSEs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. This
research would examine the MBS portfolios of GNMA and the GSEs to quantify differences in the
composition, changes in the composition over time, performance of the portfolios, and implications for
risk of losses.
To what extent is the GNMA portfolio vulnerable to climate risk?
Assessment of Climate Risk for the GNMA Portfolio - GNMA guarantees mortgage-backed securities
backed by mortgage loans insured or guaranteed by FHA, USDA, PIH, and VA. Recent increases in the
number, variety, and cost of declared disasters, changes in flood risk maps, and increasing cost of
homeowners' insurance point to increasing risk of losses at the community or regional scale. Such
damages could lead to losses in federal mortgage insurance funds and GNMA MBS programs. This study
would review the literature on climate-related risk of disasters or other losses and model the
implications for GNMA's portfolio.
How much does student loan debt influence mortgage default risk?
Student Loans and Default Risk Study - A recent report by the New York Federal Reserve finds that the
total amount of student loan debt outstanding has increased from $260 billion to $1.6 trillion in the last
15 years (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2021). A related analysis found that rising student debt
may explain over 20 percent of the decline in homeownership among 24- to 32-year-olds (Mezza, Ringo,
32
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
and Somma, 2019). Completing undergraduate or graduate degree programs offers benefits in earning
potential that may offset the financial impact of debt, but large debt burdens nevertheless make
qualifying for a mortgage more difficult. This study would use the National Mortgage Database to
examine associations between student loan debt and mortgage defaults, and whether those
associations differ across protected classes. The results may help inform mortgage underwriting policy.
How effectively does a post-purchase, light-touch homeownership counseling program prepare
FHA borrowers for sustainable homeownership?
Post-Purchase Counseling Study-HUD expects to complete the First-Time Homebuyer Education and
Counseling Demonstration 12 in 2021, but the evaluation does not test the impact of post-purchase
counseling (with the exception of homebuyer education and counseling that was delivered to a portion
of participants after a purchase agreement was signed or after closing because of the long study
enrollment process). This study would address that gap by analyzing FHA loan performance and credit
bureau data and conducting a short survey of FHA borrowers within the first 1 to 3 years of
homeownership to identify factors associated with early default versus homeownership sustainability
and to assess the effect of post-purchase counseling on FHA loan performance. HUD is well-positioned
to sponsor this research because of access to FHA loan-level data and potentially to client-level
information on counseling reported in FHA's administrative data.
What risks and benefits are associated with providing down-payment assistance and other
assistance to first-time homebuyers?
Effects of Downpayment Assistance for First-Time Homebuyers - Lack of funds for downpayment is one
of the primary barriers to homeownership. Downpayment assistance, such as a gift from parents, helps
low-wealth borrowers buy a home. Yet downpayment assistance, particularly from government and
non-profit sources, is also associated with an increased risk of default. FHA currently allows insured
mortgages to involve gifts and second liens, provided they are documented and do not originate from
the seller or other party involved in the transaction. This study would use administrative data from FHA's
Section 203(b) mortgage insurance program to address two primary research questions. First, the study
would analyze the characteristics of borrowers who use different types of downpayment assistance and
the effect of downpayment assistance on increasing equitable access to mortgage credit. This analysis
would also consider any increase in housing quality and sales prices enabled by downpayment
assistance. Second, the study would investigate the effect of different types of downpayment assistance
on the likelihood of default. The study would use survival analysis to estimate the marginal increase in
the hazards of default and FHA insurance claims from different types and sources of downpayment
12 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/hud firsttime hmbyr study.html
33
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
assistance. The analysis would also consider the competing risk of prepayment. This research would
leverage HUD's administrative data and analytic expertise to inform and support FHA policy decisions.
Who is served by PHA-administered homeownership programs and to what extent have assisted
households been able to maintain homeownership and build assets?
PHA Homeownership Program Evaluation - For the past two decades, the Voucher Homeownership
(VHO), administered by participating public housing agencies, has allowed qualified families to use their
vouchers to purchase a home and assist with monthly homeownership expenses. A 2006 study
sponsored by PD&R found very low delinquency and foreclosure rates in the program, but the program
has not been systematically studied since (Locke et al., 2006). Moreover, HUD administrative data do not
capture default, delinquency, or foreclosures for VHO households. This study would conduct a survey of
all PHAs operating the program to learn about current program operations and outcomes for buyers,
including those who no longer receive the homeownership subsidy. The study could also survey PHAs
about their use of the public housing homeownership option, in which PHAs may sell public housing
units to their residents and other eligible low-income families in their communities. The study could also
link to administrative data on delinquency and foreclosure rates and could include qualitative research
with participating households. The goal of the study would be to provide meaningful data about who is
served by PHA homeownership programs, what are their demographics, what are the characteristics of
the areas in which they lived previously and the areas in which they purchase homes, and the extent to
which homeownership has been sustainable for assisted households. Stable homeownership would be
evidence of a strategy for successfully graduating households from the regular public housing or HCV
program to homeownership.
What are the challenges and opportunities associated with small-dollar mortgages for low- and
moderate-income homebuyers?
State of the Small-Dollar Mortgage Market - While high and rising home prices present a major problem
in hotter housing markets, many potential homebuyers can face other barriers even in markets with
affordable options. Potential homebuyers, especially those looking to purchase a home for first-time,
can face challenges when trying to find lenders offering small-dollar mortgages. Recent research found
that, in 2019 26.7 percent of home sales nationwide were for homes priced below $100,000, and of
those sales only 23.2 percent were purchased with a mortgage, compared with 73.5 percent of homes
priced
at or above $100,000. 13 More work is needed to better understand scope of where small-dollar
loans would be viable nationally, including by identifying how many affordable homes could be
purchased with these loans, where these homes are located, and what kind of demand exists for
mortgage products generally. This would lay the groundwork for a range of different policy interventions
and provide an opportunity to test different approaches to expanding access to the small-dollar
mortgage market for low-and moderate-income homebuyers. In-house modeling could provide useful
13 https://www.urban.org/urban-wire/making-fha-small-dollar-mortgages-more-accessible-could-make-
homeownership-more-equitable
34
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
insights on broader market conditions, and a more intensive demonstration evaluation could explore
more substantial changes to existing programs such as: reduced fees, payment of incentives to lenders,
adjustments to terms and costs, individual financial assistance, or expanded partnerships with
community-based lenders.
Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
HUD's reports to Congress on Worst Case Housing Needs have long demonstrated the worsening gap
between a slowly increasing supply of safe, decent, affordable rental housing and a rapidly expanding
cohort of very low-income renters who need it. Housing costs include both first costs of construction
and ongoing costs of operations, maintenance, and making payments on financing. HUD seeks to
increase production of affordable housing through lower-cost financing via FHA mortgage insurance,
direct housing grants, reducing regulatory barriers, and advancing cost-effective building technologies.
The research questions activities under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 2: Ensure access
to and increase production of affordable housing, where HUD seeks to evaluate programs and conduct
research to identify ways the federal government can make it easier to access affordable housing by
implementing best practice improvements demonstrated to be successful by innovative practitioners.
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy mitigate market constraints in affordable
housing production and finance?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - What are the gaps in financing for multifamily housing in America, and under what
conditions would an expanded FHA role be likely to support both increasing the supply of
multifamily housing and preserving and enhancing the supply of naturally occurring affordable
housing?
Assessing FHA's Role in Affordable Multifamily Financing - FHA offers a range of programs supporting
the purchase, refinance, new construction, or substantial rehabilitation of rental housing. This research
would assess FHA's Multifamily loan programs current effects, strengths, and weaknesses to inform
improvements to its effectiveness. For example, the program's role in increasing the supply of affordable
rental housing in underserved areas and in neighborhoods offering greater opportunity might be
increased through sound enhancements to underwriting and credit requirements. This research would
primarily use administrative data collected by HUD's Office of Multifamily Housing to (1) examine
characteristics of FHA multifamily loans, projects, and project locations; (2) identify policies that are
effective at enhancing credit access in sound ways that provide public benefits; (3) identify internal and
external data sources that are effective at identifying underwriting and credit enhancement criteria; and
(4) use standard credit risk models to examine the performance of multifamily investments and analyze
the determinants of success.
How is the Housing Trust Fund being used to increase the production of affordable housing?
Early Implementation of the Housing Trust Fund - The Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008
(HERA) amended The Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C.
1301 et seq.) to establish the Housing Trust Fund (HTF) and HUD began allocating funding to grantees in
35
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
2016. The purpose of the HTF is to provide grants to increase and preserve the supply of rental housing
for extremely low-and very low-income families, including homeless families, and to increase
homeownership for extremely low-and very low-income families. This research would conduct a
comprehensive review of federal and state programs, policies, interventions for addressing the
affordable housing supply challenge, centering on the early implementation of HTF and on other state
and local funding. A mixed methods approach would couple analysis of national production data and
market conditions with qualitative profiles of a sample of state housing finance agencies (HFAs) and
their varied programs.
What happens to the LIHTC portfolio as communities start to reach the end of the extended use
affordability period?
LIHTC at 30 - In a 2012 PD&R report, researchers found that, for the most part, affordable housing
projects funded through the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program remained affordable as their 15-
year restrictive use period ended (Khadduri et al., 2012). The challenge, however, is that older properties
that reach the end of their compliance period will require major renovations to preserve affordable
housing units. Due to concern of the longevity of these properties to offer affordable housing,
allocations since 1990 are subject to an additional 15-year period of restricted use. This study seeks to
understand what happens to LIHTC properties as they approach and reach the 30-year mark, focusing on
owner decisions and property outcomes related to affordability for residents and property conditions
and upkeep. The study would analyze trends and summary data concerning outcomes and conduct
interviews with syndicators to understand motivating factors for keeping properties and/or their units
affordable, for converting units to market-rate housing, or for maintaining a mixture of market-rate and
affordable units.
How would changes to basis boost policies impact patterns of LIHTC development?
Locational Effects of QCT Population Caps and SDDA Implementation - HUD contributes to the
implementation of the LIHTC program by determining Qualified Census Tracts (QCTs) and Small Difficult
to Develop Areas (SDDAs), designated regions in which state housing finance agencies prioritize
allocations of Low-Income Housing Tax Credits to developers by providing a "basis boost" that increases
the number of credits a given project can receive on their eligible basis. Currently, the number of QCTs
that can be established within a given metropolitan or non-metropolitan area is constrained to 20
percent of the area's population. One key part of the study would assess the locational impact for the
LIHTC program of these basis boost policies, first by modeling the elimination of the population cap,
including the racial or ethnic concentration of the areas in which additional units would likely be sited.
Another element of the study would examine the implementation of SDDAs and whether it improves
citing of LIHTC units in high opportunity neighborhoods or encourages more concentration in QCTs. The
analysis would use QCT and SDDA data, LIHTC Property data, and data on the existing affordable housing
stock that could be obtained from the National Housing Preservation Database.
What do housing subsidies buy?
Role of Rental Subsidies in Housing Supply - The LIHTC is the primary vehicle for increasing and
improving the existing stock of affordable housing units, contributing about 100,000 new and
36
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
rehabilitated affordable rental units annually. Over the past decade, about one-third of LIHTC properties
received additional federal subsidies, such as CDBG, HOME, and project-based rental assistance.
According to HUD's LIHTC properties placed in service database, tax credit properties leveraged with
other federal subsidies are far more likely to maintain income limits below the federal maximum. This
study would examine what the additional subsidy "buys" in terms of location, affordability, and
population served and inform the debate concerning the costs of supply- and demand-side housing
assistance. The study could also explore how market conditions influence the impact of LIHTC
investment on the supply and composition of affordable housing in a given community by comparing
how LIHTC is used in markets with high and low vacancy rates.
How do zoning, subdivision regulations, procedural processes, and local land use conditions
affect housing supply, and what regulatory reforms are most effective at matching housing
supply to demand in a way that promotes inclusive communities?
Identifying Regulatory Barriers to Housing Production - PD&R has considered a variety of methods by
which to measure land use regulations and zoning provisions to track reduction in regulatory barriers.
Reviews of zoning codes and surveying regulations are time-consuming and difficult; more importantly,
they may not directly relate to what gets built and where. This research project would build an estimate
of housing supply elasticities at the lowest possible geographic level, the 9-digit ZIP code, by (a)
constructing a measure of the change in the price of homes at that level over time, which might use
commercially available data, (b) measuring the change in active units in USPS data at that level over
time, (c) identifying the relationship between the change in active units and the change in house price
within 9-digit ZIP codes as the localized elasticity of housing supply, and (d) analyzing the trends in
housing supply elasticity across time and space both for the use of policymakers and for subsequent
targeted research into local regulatory regimes. The research team could then produce a set of case
studies of communities who have implemented policies to address regulatory barriers employing these
housing production and price indices to assess the outcomes associated with those changes.
To what extent do land use policies and other regulatory factors drive differences in rents and
production of affordable rental units?
Supply Constraints and Rising Rents - Land use policies vary significantly across the United States,
ranging from very restrictive to very loose or almost nonexistent. The more restrictive these policies and
the more delays they introduce, the more costly it can become to develop housing and the less incentive
developers have to initiate projects in those locations. Overly restrictive policies may lead to an
insufficient level of housing being constructed in those areas, resulting in higher housing costs and
shortages of affordable housing for lower-income households. Looser policies can increase affordability
and enable innovations, but also can have negative consequences for a community in the form of
unorganized growth patterns, poorly funded public services, concentrated poverty, and potential
damage to the environment. The research team would draw on published methods of indexing
communities by the severity of land use policy restrictions to select a sample stratified by regulatory
restrictiveness and by the costliness of the community's housing. The team would also collect
information on the number of building permits and of homes and apartments recently constructed at
various price and rent ranges, local land use ordinances, the permitting process and permitting delays,
37
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
characteristics of housing markets such as economic and job growth statistics, and population and
household estimates. The study would determine whether statistically significant differences exist in the
supply of affordable housing across communities as a result of land use policies and would identify the
relative contributions of input costs and regulatory factors for housing cost outcomes and deterrence of
affordable housing production.
How successful have laws aimed at increasing duplexes, Accessory Dwelling Units, and other low-
density, infill housing typologies been at creating new housing supply?
Encouraging "Gentle" Density - Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are additional homes constructed on
the same lot as a single-family home. ADUs enable homeowners in certain jurisdictions to add to the
housing stock of their neighborhoods. During the 1990s HUD operated a small demonstration program,
the Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity (ECHO) Demonstration, that funded construction of small ADUs
for seniors. A new study would identify jurisdictions that are unable to provide sufficient housing supply
to meet demand and determine which of those jurisdictions prohibit ADUs, duplexes, and other low
density building typologies, allow them by-right, or allow them through variances or other regulatory
processes. Urban Institute's National Longitudinal Land Use Survey and Data (publicly available) includes
ADU information as of 2019 that could be useful for the study. For each jurisdiction, researchers would
determine using local data: how these building typologies are defined, the number of new units being
permitted and where these units are being added.
What is the potential for alternative models for housing affordability?
Innovations in Affordability - As housing becomes more expensive in markets across the country, more
and varied occupancy solutions are needed to address the needs of different populations of people
struggling to afford housing in all types of communities. Young adults, aging adults, individuals with
disabilities, and families with children have different housing needs, and there may be potential for
alternatives to the traditional single-family, single-unit model that are more cost-effective and still
appropriate for different populations of Americans, while continuing to meet federal accessibility
requirements. HUD has already undertaken some work in this area-for example, funding a project with
the German Marshall Fund to study multigeneration housing in Germany and joining a working group
with AARP to study shared housing for older adults. This project would involve a series of case studies of
entities already utilizing alternative occupancy models for cost-saving purposes-fo example, multi-
generation housing and various forms of shared housing, including short-and long-term housing
arrangements for people experiencing homeless or HUD-funded vouchers issued to participants in
shared housing.
How can affordable housing and manufactured homes promote wealth building?
Wealth Building through Affordable Homeownership - Significant research addresses the topic of wealth
building through homeownership (McCargo and Choi, 2020). This research would examine the prospect
of wealth-building through ownership of manufactured homes and other lower-cost housing options,
particularly focusing on housing programs or initiatives aimed at explicitly combatting the racial wealth
gap and addressing equity in wealth-building. This research would also examine disparities among
protected classes, such as racial disparities in wealth-building ownership of affordable housing. For this
38
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
effort, researchers would pay close attention to attributes of housing type (for example, location, land
ownership, and permanent foundation) that significantly influence the likelihood of long-term
appreciation or wealth generation, as well as factors associated with risk of depreciation or other capital
loss. The research team initially would deliver a comprehensive review of research literature on the
potential return on investment or realized success of such activities as they relate to affordable housing
and wealth building. Additionally, this project would develop further recommendations for future
empirical research approaches, which could include data collection on home prices or ways to assess
housing appreciation.
What is the impact of Davis-Bacon wage requirements on the cost of housing development,
project quality, and worker wages?
Understanding the Effects of Davis-Bacon on Housing Production - The Davis-Bacon Act of 1931 (P.L. 71-
798) (Davis-Bacon) requires that construction contractors for certain projects pay employees wages and
benefits equivalent to the prevailing wage of the area. All new construction and substantial
rehabilitation funded from FHA-insured mortgage proceeds are subject to Davis-Bacon wage
requirements. For this research, HUD would analyze available data to understand the extent to which
Davis-Bacon wage requirements affect the cost, quality, and/or supply of housing. The research would
explore whether and by how much the administrative functions required by Davis-Bacon add cost to a
project, and the accuracy of the Davis-Bacon prevailing wage determinations relative to market wages.
There are two potential research approaches: (1) examine hypothetical wage differentials using contract
data; or (2) examine whether the presence of prevailing wage laws have a realized adverse impact on
cost, project timeframes, or quality of construction.
To what extent can modular or other off-site construction methods produce affordable
accessible rental units, and how does the affordability of off-site methods compare with that of
site-built housing?
Lowering Costs Through Alternative Construction Methods -Davis-Bacon requires contractors and
subcontractors working on federally funded jobs to pay their laborers wages and benefits equivalent to
the prevailing wage of the area. This research would examine how automated, robotic, and off-site
construction practices has an impact on labor cost and implications on prevailing wage determinations
in an area. Automated and factory-built construction practices, which build modular, 3D Concrete
Printing, and panelized housing units, are streamlining processes and shifting both labor cost and
considerations. Unlike onsite construction, automated construction practices using robotic technology
and the component assemblies used in a factory setting allow for a more controlled environment and
require different skills set and job requirements for laborers. This research would explore what factors
need to be considered by developers and sponsors when examining the implications of a shift in
construction jobs, skills, and labor costs caused by automated and off-site construction trends has on
Davis-Bacon requirements and prevailing wage laws, federal and state-wide, as well as implications for
39
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
federally assisted housing to comply with federal accessibility requirements if a shift to more automated
production were utilized by developers of such housing.
Housing and Health
The public health community increasingly recognizes that housing is one of the most important social
determinants of health outcomes. Quality housing that is free from toxins and pests provides a safe
environment for living and development. Stable and affordable housing also enables occupants to focus
on other needs, reducing financial problems and stress. The research questions under this policy heading
align with Strategic Goal 4, Advance sustainable communities. One objective is to strengthen
environmental justice relative to disproportionate hazards, health risks, and substandard housing, and
another is to integrate healthcare and support services with housing, which has potential to reduce
expenditures for Medicare, Medicaid, or other programs.
Foundational Learning Question: How can HUD best address the health needs of residents in its assisted
housing programs and also bring housing assistance to those for whom lack of housing is a major barrier
to health?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - What are the most significant problems with indoor air quality in HUD-assisted
housing? What are cost-effective ways to influence positive changes in indoor air quality?
Study of Indoor Air Quality and Improvement Strategies - Indoor air quality (IAQ) is increasingly
recognized as an important factor in health outcomes. Air quality includes numerous diverse and
regionally varying challenges: allergens or chemicals that trigger asthma, fine particulates from indoor or
outdoor sources that cause respiratory and cardiovascular problems, and naturally occurring radon gas
that can cause lung cancer. This research would begin with an expert convening and literature review to
identify and summarize the state of knowledge regarding IAQ and IAQ remediation with reference to
public and assisted housing. A representative sample of HUD-assisted units could be selected for in-
depth monitoring, air sampling, measurement of contaminant levels, and assessment of causal factors.
The literature review and primary data collection would inform strategies for improving IAQ in HUD-
assisted housing. Selected strategies may be pilot tested to determine suitability and cost-effectiveness
for scaling up. There is potential to engage EPA and other federal partners in this work.
Which program designs for deploying Integrated Pest Management in public and assisted
housing are most cost-effective and manageable?
Effective Implementation Strategies for Integrated Pest Management - Healthy Homes technical studies
have shown that integrated pest management (IPM) techniques for controlling pests such as
cockroaches, bedbugs, and mice in housing offer important benefits including more effective pest
control and better health outcomes resulting from reduction of asthma triggers and pesticide exposures.
IPM techniques include controlling pest access points, removing food sources, targeted treatment, and
monitoring with sticky traps. This new research into IPM program design would use methods such as
literature review, expert convening, and key informant surveys to examine strategies for implementing
IPM in HUD-assisted housing, including options for improving early detection of pest problems in visual
40
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
inspections conducted by HUD's Real Estate Assessment Center. REAC scores also could be compared
with administratively matched AHS data. The most promising strategies can be pilot-tested at the PHAs.
How can HUD reduce the incidence of elevated blood lead levels among children of families in
the Housing Choice Voucher program?
Prevention of Elevated Blood Lead among Children in the Housing Choice Voucher Program - Lead
poisoning of young children has been a significant problem for the HCV program in jurisdictions with
deteriorating housing stock. The 2017 Lead-Safe Housing Rule (LSHR) strengthened requirements for
when and how PHAs must act when elevated blood lead is detected in children. Currently, however,
HUD does not have authority to require either lead hazard screens or lead risk assessments to be
conducted as preventive measures in pre-1978 HCV units in which a child under age 6 will reside. HUD
proposed in the 2021 Budget to provide PHAs with funding on a voluntary basis to perform lead risk
assessments and lead hazard screening in such housing units. This evaluation would examine whether
adding a lead hazard screen or risk assessment requirement could affect the leasing process and the
availability of units, and, if so, to what extent. As part of this research, researchers could also explore
lead risk data and the potential for new geospatial tools that map lead risk across geographies. The
research would help inform Congressional decision making about enacting such requirements.
How well do HUD's homeless assistance programs meet the health needs of young children and
their parents?
Family Health in the Homeless Assistance System - Among families with children experiencing
homelessness, parents with children under six are disproportionately affected (Henry et al., 2020). In
2010 HUD PD&R launched the Family Options Study, a multi-arm randomized controlled trial to study
the impact of various interventions on homeless families with children. Between 2010 and 2012 more
than 2,000 homeless families, including more than 5,000 children, were enrolled into the Family Options
Study in 12 sites located across the country. HUD recently launched a 12-year follow up with the families
randomly assigned to receive one of four interventions: Rapid Re-Housing (RRH), project-based
transitional housing, subsidy only (typically a Housing Choice Voucher), or usual care in emergency
shelter. A component of that analysis may include looking at the health and wellbeing outcomes of the
families with the youngest children served in the Family Options study using linked administrative data.
Further research could inform profiles of innovative service models paired with tools like RRH,
Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH), or HCVs to provide support specifically for parents with young
children.
What home visiting model would most successfully promote health or other beneficial outcomes
for families with children in public housing and assisted housing or emergency shelters?
Toward Home Visiting in Assisted Housing - The Mother and Infant Home Visiting Program Evaluation
(MIHOPE), conducted by the HHS Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation, is a longitudinal study of
the effects of home visiting services on child and family outcomes. MIHOPE began as the legislatively
mandated evaluation of the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting program that began in
2010 and has accumulated substantial evidence of effective practices. Home visiting provides
individually tailored support, resources, and information to expectant parents and families with young
41
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
children. Various program models may improve outcomes in maternal health, self-sufficiency, intimate
partner violence, positive parenting practices, and early childhood development. This research, which
could be done in-house in collaboration with the Administration for Children and Families' Office of
Planning, Research & Evaluation, would produce a white paper assessing the potential applicability of
various home visiting models to the needs of young families in public and assisted housing or emergency
shelters. It would develop a design for further research or pilot studies that could validate the suitability
of selected home visiting models for improving child development outcomes.
What are the most significant health disparities affecting HUD-assisted households? To what
extent do health challenges represent opportunities for cost-effective coordination of healthcare
services with housing assistance?
Assessment of Health Disparities and Healthcare Integration Options for HUD Tenants - Exploratory
research using data linkages between administrative data and national health surveys has shown that by
some measures HUD-assisted individuals have worse health than others (Helms et al., 2017) but receipt
of assistance is associated with improved outcomes on other dimensions (Fenelon et al., 2017). Recent
developments in biomedical research highlight intriguing associations between socioeconomic or
environmental conditions and chronic stress, epigenetic modifications of gene expression, chronic
disease, and cellular aging (Lawrence et al. 2021). This research effort would use data linkages and other
strategies to systematically document and understand health disparities affecting HUD-assisted
opulations-including - the role of admissions preferences for people with health challenges or
individuals with disabilities in general-to understand causal factors that perpetuate health disparities,
including disparities along racial ethnic lines, and to identify opportunities to address causal factors.
How prevalent is receipt of Medicaid Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) among HUD-
assisted households?
Examining the Integration of HUD-Assisted Housing and Home and Community Based Services -
Medicaid home and community-based services (HCBS) are long term services and supports, including
case management, personal care, and housekeeping, that provide an alternative to nursing homes and
other institutional settings and can enable individuals to remain in homes and communities. While HCBS
are typically provided to both persons with disabilities and seniors, the models on how best to integrate
housing and services are likely very different for the two groups. This study would link Medicaid,
Medicare, and HUD data to determine the prevalence of HCBS receipt (such as home health visits,
participation in HCBS waivers, and use of personal care assistant) by different programs and populations,
describe successful state models of integrating HCBS into HUD-assisted housing for seniors and non-
elderly individuals with disabilities, describe HCBS being available in integrated housing settings, provide
policy recommendations to HUD for how to support this integration from the federal level, and create
42
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
resources for public housing agencies and owners of multifamily housing on how best to bring these
services to their residents.
What accessibility features and design standards are recommended when building or
rehabilitating housing for the elderly to support residents' ability to age in place?
Design Considerations for Aging in Place - A wealth of information and requirements is available about
the accessibility of multifamily buildings, both privately and publicly funded, to individuals with
disabilities. These resources include HUD's Fair Housing Design Manual, the ANSI 117.1 standard,
International Building Code Safe Harbor Requirements, the U.S. Access Board, and the International
Residential Code. HUD's Section 504 accessibility requirements, and accessibility requirements under
the Americans with Disabilities Act also apply. Less information about accessibility is available for
residences that are not covered by the statutory requirements for accessibility under the Fair Housing
Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, or the Americans with Disabilities Act. Likewise, there is less
information regarding single family dwellings unless they are HUD-assisted, in which case they are still
subject to HUD's Section 504 requirements. This study would procure the services of an architect or
accessibility professional to develop a guidebook for constructing and modifying homes, especially
single-family homes, to be suitable for individuals with disabilities. This guidance would take into
consideration statutory requirements including Section 504 compliance, the Fair Housing Design
Manual, and the Medicare Advantage program and other similar programs that fund home accessibility
modifications. This work would also be informed by collaboration with HUD's accessibility experts in the
Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity and in the General Counsel's Office of Fair Housing.
Indian and Tribal Issues
Native American communities face numerous challenges with deteriorated housing stock, geographic
remoteness and economic isolation of tribal lands, and legal complications related to the sovereign
status of tribes and their troubled history with the federal government. This policy topic aligns with
HUD's Strategic Goal 1: Support for underserved communities, where HUD seeks to build an inclusive
future, that promotes housing stability, asset building, and wealth creation for all people and lifts
underserved communities to share in the levels of prosperity.
Foundational Learning Question: How can HUD better respond to housing and development challenges
unique to Native American communities and tribal lands?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - What is the impact of the Indian Housing Block Grant competitive grant program
for housing in tribal areas?
Indian Housing Block Grant Competitive Program Evaluation - The Indian Housing Block Grant (IHBG)
Competitive Grant Program is a new way to provide HUD housing assistance to Indian tribes. First
funded by Congress in 2018, this program has added approximately $100 million per year to the total
federal funds available for housing programs in Indian Country. This study would assess the program's
impact on units built or rehabilitated, the amount of funds leveraged through this program, and the
community-level impacts of the resulting units built or rehabilitated. For a sample of tribes, the study
43
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
would document how the new housing program fits into the whole set of tribal activities intended to
meet tribal housing needs (including IHBG formula-funded activities). Finally, the study would include an
assessment of community-level impacts from the resulting units built and rehabilitated, including the
number of families assisted, the impact on homelessness and overcrowding, physical and mental health,
accessible housing provided for persons with disabilities, and economic and educational outcomes.
What are the distinct impacts and challenges of climate change in tribal communities and U.S.
territories, and what are implications for housing and community development?
Assessing Impacts of Climate Change on Tribal Communities and U.S. Territories - Tribal Communities
and U.S. territories are some of the most impoverished and vulnerable communities in the country. Due
to socioeconomic challenges, they face exacerbating impacts of climate change on economies, agrarian
practices, housing and infrastructure, public health, and social well-being. Moreover, the unique culture,
land tenure, and legal status of tribal communities and territories complicates the deployment of aid
that might assist with adaptation and disaster recovery. While challenges in tribal communities related
to housing and community development have been the subject of recent research efforts by the
Department, the impacts of climate change on them are less understood. HUD programs that deploy aid
within these communities would benefit from more detailed data and information about the risks of
climate change to tribal communities and the impacts these may have. This study would seek to provide
a detailed understanding of the types of hazards and other environmental changes that are anticipated
to affect tribal communities throughout the U.S. and the implications these may have for housing and
community development programs, especially given the unique circumstances of many of these
communities and the disproportionate availability of data. The research would include a literature
review and interviews with local leaders, practitioners, and other experts to better understand how
climate change is impacting indigenous populations. The project would identify data sources on climate
risks and impacts that are lacking and seek ways to fill the data gap. For example, Tribal Lands and
communities are often excluded from national climate, weather, utility, geological and infrastructure
data. This research would identify instances where this is the case and facilitate coordination with other
federal agencies like the National Laboratories, to address exclusions. The research would also
document the implications of climate change and increasing natural hazard risk for tribal and territorial
housing, communities, and recommend potential tools and policy options for federal programs working
within these communities to mitigate the risks.
What are the most effective disaster recovery, mitigation, and adaptation strategies undertaken
by tribal communities, including pandemic response?
Pandemic and Disaster Preparedness, and Adaptation Strategies for Housing in Indian Country - Since
the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, billions of dollars in relief funding have gone to tribal communities
from sources at HUD and the Treasury Department. This research would document implementation of
these expanded programs, and identify effective and replicable housing assistance, pandemic response,
and disaster preparedness and adaption strategies in Indian Country through case studies. The study
would assess the impact of IHBG and the Indian Community Development Block Grant (ICDBG) program
on tribal livelihood in terms of the number of families assisted, housing units built or rehabilitated
(including accessible housing for persons with disabilities), reduction in overcrowding, and economic and
44
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
educational outcomes. Since the housing needs assessment report on American Indians, Alaska Natives,
and Native Hawaiians was published in 2017, there have been very few follow-ups or new studies on the
housing conditions in Indian Country.
How are crisis response approaches to prevent and end homelessness different in tribal areas?
Ending Homelessness in Tribal Communities - HUD data show that native American, native Hawaiian,
and Alaska natives are overrepresented among people experiencing homelessness. 14 These data may
in
fact understate the scale of the problem as data collection and the operations of the mainstream
homeless assistance system overall have largely not included tribal lands. This study would review crisis
response approaches to prevent and end homelessness in tribal areas and assess the availability and
accessibility of homelessness prevention programs operated by providers in urban, suburban, and rural
areas. The research would also identify causes, patterns, and types of homelessness in tribal
communities. The recent expansion of the CoC program to include tribal areas presents a useful
opportunity to engage tribal communities. Researching the distinct characteristics of rural homelessness
would provide better evidence about whether the current crisis response approaches are meeting the
needs of rural, tribal, Native Hawaiian, and Native Alaskan areas.
What is the feasibility of developing local sources of building components and materials in tribal
areas to reduce housing construction costs?
Maximum Economic Use of Locally Available Construction Resources - The cost of transporting building
components and materials over long distances is often a burden for Tribes, U.S. trust territories in the
Pacific and Caribbean, Alaska Native Corporations, and the Department of Hawaiian Homelands in
meeting the housing needs of their communities. A new competitive grant would support these HUD-
assisted entities by funding expert assistance to assess the feasibility of developing local sources of
components and materials, or, if they are already in pilot use, to assess their performance. Over time,
the grant program would allow HUD to host a digital library of expert reports that similarly situated
entities could consult.
Self-Sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
The purpose of HUD's extensive rental assistance programs is to ensure housing stability and improve
peoples' lives. Increasing economic opportunity for assisted households and supporting their ability to
obtain education, secure well-paying jobs, build assets and financial capability, and achieve self-
sufficiency is essential to their quality of life. Such supports accelerate wealth building and ability to
afford market-rate housing in areas of opportunity, which opens up housing units and subsidy resources
for new, struggling households, and thereby makes the programs more effective in serving urgent
housing needs. The questions presented under this policy topic align with HUD's strategic Goal 2: Ensure
access to and increase production of affordable housing in areas of opportunity, where HUD seeks to
review the services and supports delivered to families receiving HUD assistance to ensure they are
14 ittps://files.hudexchange.info/reports/published/CoC_PopSub NatlTerrDC 2020.pdf
45
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
equitably administered and focused on meeting families' needs by building on their strengths and being
flexible enough to meet each families' unique goals.
Foundational Learning Question: How can housing assistance, including temporary assistance, best
support moves to opportunity neighborhoods, human capital development, and increased economic
opportunity?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - What additional approaches can encourage asset building among HUD-assisted
households?
Asset Building Demonstration Evaluation - In contrast to a subsidy intended to maintain minimum levels
of consumption, an effective asset building program could help very low-income families build assets. An
effective asset building program for HUD-assisted households could make HUD assistance into a more
effective program for work-able households and for the children in HUD-assisted households, but HUD
knows very little about the impacts of asset building programs focused on outcomes related to building
or improving credit, savings and investments, home equity, or education and training among HUD-
assisted households. A rigorous study of the Family Self-Sufficiency (FSS) program, a component of
which focuses on building an escrow account, shows that after 3 years in the 5-year program,
participants improved their financial literacy and confidence, but had not increased income or
employment outcomes (Verma et al., 2021). In terms of credit building, a simulation study suggests that
including rent payments in credit scoring algorithms could improve credit for many HUD-assisted
households (Turner et al., 2019). A new study of asset building could take the form of a demonstration
through which PHAs could evaluate the impacts of programs that incentivize savings or that help
residents build or improve credit, such as through reporting rent payments to credit reporting agencies.
What is the unmet need for childcare among HUD-assisted households with children?
Childcare Needs of Assisted Households - HUD-assisted households frequently cite lack of access to
childcare as a major barrier to working. HUD has launched a collaborative research effort with the
Administration for Children and Families of the Department of Health and Human Services to assess the
take-up and impact of childcare among residents living in HUD-assisted housing and work-related
outcomes of using childcare. The current study would document innovative models for providing an
array of childcare services that meet the unique work-related needs of low-income households
associated with non-standard working hours, unpredictable work schedules, and limited transportation
options. To supplement that work, researchers could create a matched data set with HUD administrative
data and state-level childcare data to assess unmet childcare needs among HUD-assisted households.
What effect does improved access to affordable childcare have on the employment outcomes of
parents/guardians and on the developmental outcomes of children?
Meeting the Needs of Working Families in Assisted Housing - HUD-assisted households frequently cite
lack of access to childcare as a major barrier to employment. This study would explore innovative
models for the provision of childcare services that meet the challenges facing low-income households
such as non-standard working hours, last-minute work schedule changes, and limited transportation
46
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
options. HUD could encourage PHAs to develop partnerships with childcare providers and local
employers and apply for a competitive grant to fund an innovative model for childcare services. This
research would study the take-up of childcare services via the model and the extent to which the
childcare provided enabled parents to increase their employment. The research would also study what
hurdles remain preventing parents/guardians from utilizing childcare services and increasing their
employment. The project would require a mixed-methods approach including administrative analysis
and primary data collection. The research team would conduct interviews with program administrators
to understand what partnerships have been created and what childcare services are offered and with
residents to learn about whether and how the services are meeting families' needs. Data from NDNH
and HUD's administrative data could be linked to assess the impact of providing childcare services on
households' earnings.
What proportion of public housing residents employed under Section 3 requirements receive
training or certifications to improve their long-term employment prospects?
Evaluating Section 3 - HUD's Section 3 regulation prioritizes low-income and very low-income
individuals for employment and on-the-job training opportunities generated by HUD-funded projects.
About 10,000 to 20,000 trainees and new hires are reported every year, but HUD does not have data on
the extent to which training and experienced gained from working on Section 3-funded projects
improves long-term employment prospects for low-and very low-income individuals, including public
housing residents. Understanding best practices and outcomes would help PHAs and other Section 3-
funded entities decide how to devote resources to increasing employment of low-income persons and
whether to devote resources to training services. Research could involve case studies of training efforts
and employment retention strategies, and/or longitudinal studies of participants in Section 3 initiatives.
Any research specific to public housing residents would have to consider implicit disincentives from
income-based rent subsidies. This research would draw on the lessons of HUD's evaluation of the
Section 3 program's implementation (HUD, 1996) and inform how HUD promotes and monitors Section
3 in the future. The study could also serve as a platform for further research into opportunities for the
federal government to meet goals of supporting small businesses and providing employment
opportunities for low-income residents while increasing the supply of affordable housing.
How many HUD-assisted tenants receive services from other federal programs focused on labor
market outcomes?
Connecting Assisted Households to the Workforce System - Internal HUD systems track information on
transfer income from other federal programs, but this information is incomplete. Little is known about
how often HUD-assisted tenants access labor market-oriented services, or about the level of services
received from programs like Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) or Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program-Employment and Training (SNAP-E&T), or at American Jobs Centers. This project
would undertake a data matching process to link tenant data from HUD systems including the Public and
Indian Housing Information Center (PIC) and the Tenant Rental Assistance Certification System (TRACS)
with administrative and/or survey data on a range of programs that support self-sufficiency, including
healthcare programs. PD&R would use these matched data to determine the portion of HUD-assisted
households who receive benefits from other federal programs that support self-sufficiency efforts. A
47
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
series of small grants could be made available for researchers to propose studies to make use of the
matched data. HUD could also partner with the Census Bureau to match HUD administrative data to the
Survey of Income and Program Participation and identify other administrative data sources housed at
the Census Bureau that could provide more insight into the overlap of HUD's tenant population with
other programs that support self-sufficiency.
Are there service delivery models evaluated in the research literature that could improve self-
sufficiency outcomes for HUD-assisted households?
Lessons Learned in Promoting Economic Opportunity - Numerous federal agencies, including the
Department of Labor, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Department of
Agriculture, administer programs designed to support labor market attachment and increased self-
sufficiency of low-income households. HUD also has several programs designed to help residents move
towards self-sufficiency including the FSS program, Jobs Plus, and the Resident Opportunities and Self-
Sufficiency Service Coordinator (ROSS-SC) program. HUD has evaluated these programs individually at
different points in time, and with different levels of rigor, but has not looked across the results of these
evaluations together in a larger context of identifying "what works." This project would identify and
synthesize existing research on programs designed to support labor market attachment and increased
self-sufficiency among low-income households, including HUD's self-sufficiency programs, to describe
common programmatic elements, key differences, programs, or components of programs that have
been successful or unsuccessful for different populations, and what questions we still lack evidence to
answer. This project could produce issue briefs targeted to PHAs with an overview of successful
elements worth replicating, pitfalls to avoid, and uncertainties that must be considered in program
design.
What are the costs and benefits of making broadband internet services a reimbursable expense
for providers of HUD-assisted housing?
Enhancing Connectivity in Assisted Housing - High-bandwidth internet access is increasingly a
prerequisite for educational opportunities, job openings, and a broad range of social, cultural, and
economic needs. This study would assess the "internet readiness" of the HUD housing stock (housing
choice voucher, public housing, and multi-family section 8), considering the availability of internet
connections, internet capacity/bandwidth, the cost to households of internet access, the availability of
internet-ready devices, and other barriers to internet access and use by assisted families including
whether those barriers differ for protected classes. The study would also assess potential methods for
funding internet access for assisted households, such as direct payments to property owners or
increases to utility allowances, electrification methods, building codes, and estimate the costs of
implementing different approaches.
What is the policy value of implementing rent payment reporting to credit bureaus, and what are
the equity tradeoffs for households in HUD-assisted housing?
Building Credit Through Assisted Housing - California Senate Bill SB 1157 requires operators of
multifamily units in California that receive federal, state or local subsidies to offer residents the option of
having their rental payments reported to a major credit bureau. The goal of the bill is to provide renters
48
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
with the option to use their monthly rent payments as a way to build their credit history and/or increase
their credit score. The implementation of SB1157 provides an opportunity to study the policy value of
implementing rent payment reporting to credit bureaus using a large state sample. The study could
consider the implementation of the law as well as the impact on tenants and housing providers. An
implementation study could, for examine the take-up rate among tenants, the demographics of the
tenants who opt-in as compared to renters generally, the experiences of landlords in collecting and
reporting the data, and the costs to multifamily owners and/or tenants. An impact study could
examine the extent to which the law reduced credit invisibility and/or increased credit scores by
comparing outcomes for those who opted into the credit reporting to those who did not, or by
comparing multifamily tenants in California to those in other state(s) where rent payment reporting is
not an option. A longer-term study could also consider the impact of the rent reporting on mortgage
issuances and racial disparity in mortgage approvals.
Vulnerable and Special Populations
At the core of HUD's mission - to create strong, sustainable, inclusive communities and quality
affordable homes for all - is the recognition that individuals with varied life experiences, histories of
housing instability, homelessness, or disability deserve programs that meet their needs. This requires a
focus on the programs dedicated to serving individuals with distinct needs, and better understanding the
way all HUD programs can serve all populations in an equitable way. The questions presented under this
policy topic align with HUD's strategic Goal 1: Support for underserved communities, where HUD seeks to
fortify support for underserved communities by supporting increased access to housing assistance
among underserved communities and by implementing a Housing First approach to reducing
homelessness. Work under this policy topic will improve HUD's programs that address housing needs of
people experiencing homelessness, seniors, individuals with disabilities, and other groups with unique
service needs or barriers to long-term housing security.
Foundational Learning Question: How can housing assistance respond more effectively to varied
individual needs of people who have barriers to housing stability, and what combination of supports and
policies are most effective at preventing evictions, homelessness, and housing insecurity for lower income
persons?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - How did PHAs and Continuum of Care groups (CoCs) partner to administer their
allocation of Emergency Housing Vouchers (EHV) and what were the outcomes of tenants who
leased up with an EHV?
Emergency Housing Voucher Program Evaluation - The American Rescue Plan provided funding for
about 70,000 emergency housing vouchers for individuals and families who are homeless; at risk of
homelessness; fleeing, or attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking
or human trafficking; or recently homeless and for whom providing rental assistance will prevent the
family's homelessness or having high risk of housing instability. Evaluating the EHV program is critical to
understanding the success of the program in serving the target populations and informing future HUD
efforts to target vouchers towards households that are homeless or at risk of homelessness. This mixed
49
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
methods evaluation would document: 1) how PHAs and CoCs structured and implemented the EHV
program in order to serve the target populations, 2) which households (by location, race/ethnicity,
homeless status and other characteristics, such as disability and status as fleeing or attempting to flee
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or human trafficking) accessed and/or were
served by the EHV program, and which households were not, and 3) short-term outcomes (e.g., length
of tenure, neighborhood and housing type) for households that successfully leased up with an EHV. This
research would help HUD understand the relationships between the almost 700 PHAs nationwide
administering the vouchers and the CoCs, and document how communities used the substantial
administrative fees and set of alternative waivers designed to reduce barriers often faced by the target
population when attempted to lease a housing unit using a voucher.
To what extent did the Emergency Rental Assistance Program prevent evictions and
homelessness in the short-term, did it have lasting effects on housing stability, and could it serve
as a model for future HUD programs?
Emergency Rental Assistance Program Evaluation - Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, Congress
has appropriated billions of dollars to federal government agencies to help people subject to
catastrophic income loss maintain their housing and avoid eviction and homelessness. The Department
of Treasury's Emergency Rental Assistance Program (ERAP) has allocated a total of $46.5 billion over two
rounds of funding to cities, counties, and states to help keep people in their homes. This study would
research the uses of ERAP funds and their effectiveness in helping households avoid eviction and
homelessness and maintain housing stability. The research could include multiple components: 1) a
national analysis of the uses of ERAP-answering questions such as how quickly were communities able
to help families in need, how were their programs designed, what activities they chose to fund, and
what barriers they faced to using the funds or reaching certain populations; 2) studies of ERAP
implementation in diverse local communities to learn about approaches were perceived to be most
effective in terms of eviction and homelessness prevention and lessons learned for future investment in
emergency assistance; and 3) outcome, impact, and cost studies to evaluate the effectiveness different
models, using metrics such as the rate at which assisted families subsequently experience eviction or
homelessness or the racial and demographic characteristics of those able to access assistance. The goal
of the research would be to contribute substantially to the evidence base on the role of short-term
assistance in preventing eviction and promoting long-term housing stability and to lay the groundwork
for a national demonstration of the most promising models.
How were eviction and foreclosure moratoria implemented during the pandemic, and what
lessons does that experience have for the future?
Lessons from Pandemic Response in the Rental and Mortgage Markets - In response to the COVID-19
pandemic and subsequent economic downturn, federal, state, and local governments enacted national,
state, and local eviction moratoria and moratoria on foreclosure actions in an effort to preserve housing
50
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
stability.
15
The moratoria varied in the types of actions covered and the timeframes for which they were
in
place. The Eviction Lab estimates that the national CDC eviction moratorium reduced evictions from
rental housing by about half between September 2020 and July 2021. 16 This study would provide an
overview of the eviction and foreclosure moratoria implemented during the pandemic, contrasting that
effort with the response to the foreclosure crisis from 2007 to 2010. The study would employ a mixed
methods approach to learn about and estimate the magnitude of the effects of the moratoria and earlier
policy interventions for landlords, lenders, homeowners, and tenants, as well as for housing markets
overall during both periods. To the extent possible, the study would use naturally occurring
experiments-moratoria implemented in areas with similar rates of eviction and/or foreclosure for
different periods of time-to estimate the impact of the moratoria on key outcomes related to housing
stability. The study would also conduct key stakeholder interviews to identify lessons learned from the
implementation of national, state, and local policy responses that will help inform future efforts to
preserve homeownership and prevent evictions during periods of economic crisis.
How are HUD grantees implementing the Eviction Protection Grant Program?
Eviction Protection Grant Program- The Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations Act provided $20 million for
legal services to low-income tenants at risk of eviction. 17 HUD awarded the funding to nonprofit and
government entities in November 2021, for use through December 2023. This evaluation would analyze
the range of services funded by the grant program, as well as related services provided through other
funding sources and through the court systems, to document the approaches used to prevent eviction.
The mixed methods evaluation would gather qualitative information on the most successful approaches
and collect data on evictions and other housing stability outcomes to document the overall effectiveness
of the interventions and to compare outcomes for different types of tenants served and for different
program approaches. The goal of the study would be to learn which approaches are most effective
under what circumstances and how legal services and housing services can work together to help
tenants avoid eviction altogether or avoid the most harmful effects of eviction.
What have been the challenges and outcomes associated with implementing pandemic-related
programs to prevent and end homelessness?
Deploying Homeless Assistance Resources During the Pandemic - The homeless assistance system has
faced considerable strain and undergone significant evolution since the start of the pandemic. In 2020,
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and. Economic Security Act (P.L. 116-136) (CARES Act) provided $4 billion
through the Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG) program to prevent, prepare for, and respond to
coronavirus among individuals and families who are homeless or receiving homeless assistance and to
support additional homeless assistance and homelessness prevention activities to mitigate the impacts
created by coronavirus. FEMA's Category B COVID-19 Emergency Protective Measures have also been
15 Federal moratoria authorized by section 4022 (foreclosure moratorium) and 4024 (eviction moratorium) of the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and. Economic Security Act (P.L. 116-136)
16
https://evictionlab.org/updates/research/eviction-filing-trends-after-cdc-
noratorium/#:~:text=On%20August%2026%2C%202021%2C%20the,fewer%20eviction%2Ofilings%20than%20norma
17 https://www.hud.gov/program offices/spm/gmomgmt/grantsinfo/fundingopps/fy21 evictiongrantprogram
51
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
used to provide non-congregate shelter, mostly in hotels and motels, to people experiencing
homelessness. Communities around the country have used these FEMA resources to expand access to
non-congregate shelter units to compensate for a drop in capacity among many shelters to allow for
social distancing and to provide space for people experiencing homelessness to isolate and quarantine.
In 2021, Section 3205 of the American Rescue Plan Act (P.L. 117-2) (ARP) provided $5 billion through the
HOME program and created new eligible activities for HOME participating jurisdictions to provide
homelessness assistance and supportive services to primarily benefit ARP-defined qualifying individuals
and families. This research would evaluate and document the implementation of these expanded
resources, including how communities chose to use the funding within the eligible uses, document the
extent to which these resources were used together or with a community strategy, analyze costs of new
types of assistance relative to existing models, the temporary and ongoing changes to the homeless
assistance system, who was served during this time, including persons with disabilities and victims of
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking, and analysis of housing stability
outcomes across these expanded programs.
What are the barriers people experiencing unsheltered homelessness face when trying to access
the shelter system, and what can shelter providers do to address these barriers?
Unsheltered Homelessness: Perspectives and Barriers to Shelter - After declining steadily nearly a
decade, the overall number of people experiencing homelessness recorded in HUD's Point in Time Count
has risen every year since 2016. Nationally, this trend is driven by an increase in the number of people
experiencing unsheltered homelessness, which increased just over 30% between 2015 and 2020 while
the number of people in shelters has gone down. Accompanying these trends is a growing reality that
some people may choose to remain unsheltered rather than enter emergency facilities because of a
range of barriers, including concerns about safety, discrimination (including based on gender identity),
or limitations on partners, pets, and possessions. Seeking to expand upon and complement an effort by
researchers at the University of California at San Francisco focused on unsheltered adults in California,
this research would support a series of regional survey and qualitative data collection efforts designed to
document the characteristics, experiences, and barriers of people experiencing unsheltered
homelessness. Original data collection could take place alongside the Point in Time count with more
detailed supplemental survey instruments, or separately in efforts to intentionally sample harder to
reach groups within the unsheltered population. Survey data could be supplemented with more detailed
qualitative and ethnographic data collection via interviews or focus groups that would explore people's
perceptions about the homeless assistance system and opportunities to exit unsheltered homelessness.
What kinds of homelessness prevention and diversion strategies are communities employing,
and which strategies are most effective at resolving homelessness and preventing returns to
homelessness?
Homelessness Prevention Demonstration Evaluation - In communities around the country, high housing
costs are the primary driver of increased inflow into homelessness that has caused homeless counts to
rise nationally over the past few years, even as exits from homelessness to permanent housing have also
increased. Permanent Supportive Housing using the Housing First model is the optimal, evidence-based
intervention for people experiencing chronic homelessness, but there may be other more cost-effective
52
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
interventions for those with lower levels of needs. Research from the California Policy Lab on a set of
homelessness prevention interventions deployed in Los Angeles County shows these programs can be
successful at resolving homelessness and fostering housing stability with levels of assistance that are
substantially less costly than long-term subsidies or extended shelter stays. 18 This study would build on
the Policy Lab's work with a multi-site random assignment study of the costs and effectiveness of
homelessness prevention interventions. The study would test the effects of receiving three types of
interventions-lower intensity interventions like one-time housing assistance or a shallow time-limited
subsidy; moderate intensity interventions like rapid re-housing; and higher intensity interventions like
permanent housing subsidies-relative to the usual care offered to people experiencing homelessness in
the community. HUD and the research team would work to integrate program delivery into the existing
Coordinated Entry system to target people experiencing homelessness who would not otherwise be
prioritized for slots in Permanent Supportive Housing.
For what portion of people experiencing homelessness is Rapid Rehousing the right resource,
and what will the optimal program structure and duration be in different housing markets?
Effective Targeting of Rapid Re-Housing - Rapid Re-Housing (RRH) programs, which provide services
and/or short- to medium-term rental assistance for people experiencing homelessness, have grown
considerably over the past decade. The Family Options study used an experimental design and yielded
findings on the impact of receiving RRH on housing stability relative to usual care in shelter, transitional
housing, or a permanent subsidy without services (Gubits et al., 2016). RRH programs have become both
more sophisticated and widely adopted, and the housing market has changed dramatically since the
Family Options study was launched in the aftermath of the housing crisis. The more recent
Understanding Rapid Re-Housing Study focused on providing rich descriptive data on program
components and operations (Dunton et al., 2019) as well as participants' experiences both during and
after receipt of RRH assistance over a 15-month period (Jefferson et al., 2020). This new study would use
existing data on RRH program components and size to identify communities with programs large enough
to produce a quantitative analysis of both short- and long-term outcomes (primarily returns to
homelessness) of participants, taking into account changes in the local housing market over the period
studied.
What strategies best support formerly homeless tenants who wish to "Move-On" from
Permanent Supportive Housing?
Implementing Move-On Strategies in Permanent Supportive Housing - A considerable body of research
supports using Permanent Supportive Housing with a Housing First approach to promote housing
stability and improve a range of other outcomes among people experiencing chronic homeless. PSH is
characterized by the combination of non-time limited housing assistance and intensive case
management or other supportive services. However, some housing providers and tenants feel that a
subset of PSH residents could successfully "Move-On" to other types of permanent housing assistance
that do not have an on-going services component, such as a Housing Choice Voucher, thus freeing up
18 Ittps://www.capolicylab.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Predicting and Preventing Homelessness in Los Angeles.pdf
53
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
valuable and scarce PSH resources for currently unassisted people, including those experiencing chronic
homelessness. A set of case studies of communities with substantive Moving-On programs would allow
HUD to better understand the approaches used by implementing COCs and PHAs, as well as the
challenges and opportunities associated with the model. This approach could couple qualitative data
from key local stakeholders, including tenants, with administrative data on outcomes. The interviews
with tenants could shed light on what services and accommodations formerly homeless people need
and desire both in a PSH context, and as they move on to housing assistance without formal services.
What are the long-term outcomes of the Section 811 Housing for Persons with Disabilities
program?
Section 811 Program Long-term Outcomes Evaluation - The Frank Melville Supportive Housing
Investment Act of 2010 authorized a new model of housing assistance for individuals with
disabilities-the Section 811 Project Rental Assistance (PRA) Program-and mandated an evaluation of
the program's effectiveness. The program's goal is to expand access to high-quality, affordable housing
and elective, community-based services to allow eligible people to live successfully in the community.
HUD implemented the evaluation of the Section 811 PRA program in phases. Phase I focused on the
initial 18 months of program implementation and included a process evaluation (Pinkett et al., 2018) and
six case studies (Northrop et al., 2018). Phase II assessed outcomes and effectiveness of the PRA
program in six states and compared the results to outcomes for similar populations living in other
federally assisted and unassisted housing settings (Vandawalker et al., 2020). The Phase II evaluation
found that the PRA program serves a lower-income and higher-need population than any other HUD
program. Early outcomes indicate that the program offers more integrated housing opportunities in
which individuals with disabilities reside with individuals without disabilities, but neighborhood and
housing quality indicators are lower for PRA units compared to units in other HUD programs. Residents
have overall access to voluntary services and supports, with service gaps in some areas. PRA rental
subsidy costs are similar or lower than for other HUD programs, but administrative costs are higher. This
mixed-methods research study would supplement earlier work by linking CMS data to HUD
administrative data and by conducting interviews and surveys with program participants and key
informants of state and program agencies. The study would help HUD better understand healthcare
outcomes, program tenure, and service gaps across a larger sample of PRA states and assisted
households and over a longer period.
Are Mainstream, Non-Elderly Disabled (NED) vouchers an effective intervention for persons with
disabilities experiencing homelessness?
Mainstream Non-Elderly Disabled Voucher Program Evaluation - In fiscal years 2017-2019, Congress
appropriated approximately $500 million for new Mainstream voucher assistance for non-elderly
persons with disabilities, the first funding for new Mainstream vouchers since 2005. HUD awarded a
combined $230 million in funding for over 27,000 new vouchers to 435 PHAs between 2018 and 2019.
These recent awards prioritized PHAs that give preference to persons who are homeless or at risk of
homelessness, persons transitioning out of institutional or other segregated settings or at risk of
institutionalization, or persons transitioning out of PSH or a rapid re-housing project. This research
would assess how the program is being implemented, who is being served, how partnerships are being
54
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
used, and what the initial outcomes are, including equity implementations. The evaluation would also
identify successes and challenges associated with the program's implementation, barriers to
participation by eligible persons, including challenges related to referral of persons transitioning out of
institutional or other segregated settings and to implementation of HUD's waiting list rules. The research
would use both qualitative and quantitative analysis, employing HUD administrative data, surveys,
interviews with program stakeholders and participants, and field observations. HUD would collaborate
with HHS in the design and implementation of the study of this expanding program.
What are the costs and preparation necessary for older adults to age in place successfully in
public and assisted housing?
Understanding Successful Aging in Place in HUD-assisted Housing - Growth in the elderly U.S.
population, the sizable number of HUD-assisted households with elderly residents, and the shortage of
accessible housing for individuals with disabilities point to the importance of better understanding the
accessibility of the HUD-assisted stock and the extent to which the stock supports healthy aging in place.
This research would assess the characteristics of those residents living in HUD-assisted housing who are
most likely to age in place, the factors affecting their decisions to remain in HUD-assisted housing, and
changes over time in the characteristics of older adults in HUD-assisted housing over time. The study
would use survey data linked with HUD administrative data and other administrative datasets such as
Medicare and Medicaid claims data. In the first phase, researchers would use tenant data to identify
individuals who are currently "aging in place" in HUD-assisted housing, examine their demographic and
health characteristics, and identify trends in the population that could inform projections about how the
group might expand, contract, or behave in the future. Second, researchers would field a survey of a
sample of current residents within various programs to provide information about the experiences of
older adults living in HUD-assisted housing, including the accessibility or other needs they have or
anticipate having (including needs for accessibility features to assist with various mobility, vision, and
hearing impairments) that might force them out of independent living because the features are
unavailable in their current housing. Another survey of older adults who are exiting HUD-assisted
housing could provide complementary information about causes of exits, including accessibility issues.
How well are housing protections provided under the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)
assisting victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault and stalking achieve
housing stability?
Emergency Transfer Requests - Victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking
are a vulnerable population with unique housing needs and concerns. VAWA provides certain housing
protections to assist victims in obtaining and remaining in covered housing programs, including covered
housing programs administered by HUD and HUD recipients. Among other protections, victims may be
eligible for emergency transfers from their current HUD-assisted unit when they meet eligibility
requirements. This study would focus on the extent to which emergency transfers are successfully
utilized, including information on how often emergency transfers are sought, what kind of emergency
transfers are sought and granted (e.g., internal or external), and whether covered housing providers
55
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
understand and offer this option consistent with VAWA obligations. This information will be helpful in
better serving victims and ensuring their long-term housing stability.
Enhanced Data and Methods
The Evidence Act highlights evidence-building as central to improving policy and programs. The Act
seeks to foster a robust culture of evaluation and research under the leadership of the Evaluation Officer
and strong data governance under the leadership of the Chief Data Officer. The questions presented
under this policy topic align with HUD's Strategic Goal 5: Strengthen HUD's Internal Capacity, where HUD
works to strengthen the Department's internal capacity and efficiency to better ensure delivery of HUD's
mission. This crosscutting topic has a specific focus on improving HUD's capacity to collect data, measure
impact, and measure program outcomes in support of evidence-based decision making. Further
discussion of Data Priorities for Evidence Building, including data gaps, is available in Section 3.
Foundational Learning Question: How should HUD improve data, methods, and processes to build
capacity for evidence-based policymaking?
Priority Research Questions:
Top Priority - How can HUD capture "positive" and "negative" outcomes and motivations for exit
by assisted tenants?
Tracking Reasons for Exit from Assisted Housing - While most types of HUD rental assistance are not
time limited by design, people leave assistance for myriad reasons both positive and negative. This
project would draw on evidence about exit outcomes from two ongoing demonstrations (Rent Reform
and Family Self-Sufficiency) to develop a proxy for assisted households who are on a path that could
support a program exit where the household is likely to achieve housing stability, security, and economic
opportunity without HUD assistance. Longitudinal administrative data about program participation and
exit could be linked with local employment data and housing market data including Fair Market Rents to
support econometric modeling of the likelihood of positive exits in the context of local markets. The
results could inform focused initiatives to develop targeted and coordinated supports to promote
economic opportunity and asset building over the long term.
What data linkages should HUD invest in as permanent, regular linkages and what data linkages
can remain as ad-hoc efforts?
Assessment of HUD's Existing and Potential Data Linkages - HUD's administrative data contain a wealth
of information about the populations and communities the Department serves. Linking HUD data with
survey data and administrative data from external sources has already generated new perspectives and
opportunities to answer questions beyond the scope of what can be learned from HUD data alone.
Utilizing external data that are already collected can also improve targeting, reduce duplication in
collection effort, and diminish the private burden of responding to HUD data requests or conducting
special purpose surveys. The first phase of this study would integrate insights from published or
unpublished assessments of data linkages involving the AHS, ACS, National Health Interview Survey,
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, and CMS data to summarize issues of data pre-
56
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
processing, linkage methods, privacy preservation, and linkage error. The second phase of this report
would recommend a process to discover additional data linkage opportunities.
Could HUD link IRS, HUD, and Census records to add to the evidence base on the effects of
housing assistance on tenants' employment, income, and earnings?
IRS Data Matching - Prior research generally finds negative, though somewhat inconsistent, effects of
housing assistance on tenants' employment, income, and earnings. In large part, these inconsistent
results stem from methodological difficulties inherent in the study of the housing assisted population.
This project would link HUD, IRS, and decennial Census records using the Person Identification Validation
System. Once linked, the data can provide detailed individual income information for the HUD-assisted
population working for an employer (via IRS Forms W-2) and household (tax unit) income information
for the population filing an income tax return (via IRS Forms 1040). This linkage would: 1) allow HUD
researchers to gauge the income trajectories of HUD-assisted individuals over time and track their
receipt of tax benefits, 2) compare the income trajectories of individuals receiving different types of
HUD housing assistance, including different demographic subgroups, to gauge the relative efficacy of
different HUD programs in generating positive economic outcomes, and 3) assess income trajectories for
individuals both while on HUD assistance and after exiting HUD programs to better understand why
individuals exit and how they fare after exiting HUD programs.
What can HUD learn about mortality outcomes through data linkages with the Census Bureau?
Mortality Data Matching - It is well documented that mortality rates are higher for low-income groups
relative to wealthier ones. This research proposes to study changes in mortality in the HUD-assisted
population as well as among individuals who have left the HUD program in the last two decades (1995-
2015). This research proposes to link HUD administrative data to Census Numident records to identify
deaths occurring between 1995 and 2015 among former and current HUD program beneficiaries. In
addition, HUD individual-level records would be linked to their matching ACS responses (when available)
to better understand the demographic and socioeconomic characteristic of individuals who died during
enrollment in the HUD program, and those who died after they left the HUD program. This project
would allow HUD researchers to study mortality patterns in the former and current HUD rental-assisted
populations relative to other low-income populations and to the general population of the U.S.
Are there components of HUD's administrative data collection that do not yield sufficiently
complete and/or high quality data for effective policymaking? How can these deficiencies be
addressed?
Improving HUD's Tenant Data - Tenant data collected from housing providers with Forms HUD-50058
and HUD-50059 provide crucial information about characteristics of families utilizing HUD rental
assistance through the Office of Public and Indian Housing and the Office of Multifamily Housing,
respectively. While these forms provide valuable data on HUD-assisted families, the quality of the data is
hampered by flaws in question design and inconsistencies in PHA reporting processes. For example, the
definition of a "person with disabilities" used in these forms differs from the definition in the Fair
Housing Act, Section 504, and the Americans with Disabilities Act, which may result in housing providers
not fully reporting on the participation of individuals with disabilities in these programs. This two-phase
57
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
study would require HUD's Office of the Chief Data Officer to work with a contractor to provide
recommendations for improving the utility of these forms. The first phase of the study would focus on
the form design alone to (1) assess how well questions on these forms allow HUD to monitor program
objectives, (2) identify questions that have a potential high respondent burden and offer alternatives to
reduce burden or ensure completeness of date, (3) identify opportunities to implement uniform
terminology across these and other HUD forms to make comparison of data easier, and (4) provide
recommendations for updating questions on the forms including opportunities for data standardization.
The second phase of the study would assess how the use of third-party reporting systems affects the
quality of data input from these forms. This work would highlight the pros and cons of the most
common third-party systems used for reporting data from these forms; present case studies illustrating
the most common errors that occur for PHAs while reporting using third-party systems; estimate the
impact of reporting error and discuss the implication; and discuss the benefits of HUD potentially
providing its own application programming interface for PHA reporting in terms of reducing reporting
error and whether the benefits would outweigh the costs.
Which data currently collected on paper forms would support useful policy analysis and
performance assessment if digitized in accessible and searchable form?
Digitizing HUD Data - Paper forms such as some Housing Choice Voucher forms may not be submitted
to HUD by program partners, and others that are submitted to HUD field offices are not centralized or
digitized in a way that supports effective information management or evidence-building. Digitizing PHA
plans, for example, could provide analytical access to Admissions Continued Occupancy Plans, wait list
plans, and other key policy documents, such as policies implementing fair housing and civil rights
requirements, and could support HUD's machine learning initiative and policy-focused research. This
project would assemble a Task Force working in coordination with the Office of the Chief Data Officer to
(1) catalog data elements that are available to program offices but are not captured in an electronic
reporting system or available in an electronic format that facilitates program monitoring and evaluation,
and (2) develop criteria to evaluate the added value of capturing a non-digital asset electronically and
prioritize high-utility non-digital assets. HUD would then work with a contractor to (3) assess the
opportunity and challenges for converting high-utility non-digital assets to an accessible electronic
record and (4) recommend short-term and long-term solutions for digitizing these assets in a way that is
responsive to effective administrative processes, stakeholder collaboration, and technological capacity.
Are there data sources that HUD maintains internally that could be made public while protecting
privacy?
Transparency and Privacy in Public Data Assets - Data sharing facilitates high-value information being
used to improve public knowledge of the HUD programs and its operations; evaluate the success of
programs in meeting agency goals; and increase HUD accountability and responsiveness. This research
would support the development of HUD's Data Sharing Plan in compliance with the Evidence Act
through these objectives:
Assess the current catalog of shared data assets to provide insight into the classification,
availability, accuracy, and integrity of shared datasets used in HUD- sponsored evaluations.
58
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Evaluate internal and external platforms used to share data from contracted research to
determine the uniformity of methods used to share data by different offices.
Identify impediments to data sharing given existing OMB policies, such as Paperwork Reduction
Act guidance and privacy guidance, and recommend clarifying guidance or revisions to such
policies to promote data sharing at HUD.
Recommend a data sharing policy in accordance with federal statutes and executive orders that
would ensure that personally identifiable information is not included in any shared data. A
proposed policy should address any impediments to data sharing that were identified, and
should address issues including proper storage methods, acceptable data formats, archiving,
and access rights for different types of users.
Propose a structure for sharing research data publicly on HUDUSER.gov that greatly improves
upon what is currently available and facilitates the replication of findings from HUD studies.
How do REAC physical inspection results for the HUD stock compare with occupant-reported
data from the American Housing Survey and the American Healthy Homes Survey?
Healthy Homes Attributes of HUD-Assisted Housing Units - HUD's Real Estate Assessment Center
conducts physical inspections of housing units assisted through HUD's project-based programs. These
inspections address numerous conditions associated with the health and safety of the units and
buildings. The tenants occupying those units may have different perspectives on the quality of their
homes that are captured in the AHS and American Healthy Homes Surveys. This study would use data
matching at the Census Bureau's research data center to associate REAC inspection results with survey
data. The survey data may validate the inspection results as well as identify opportunities for future
enhancements to the National Standards for Physical Inspection of Real Estate (NSPIRE).
What would be the policy value of creating a national evictions database, including how the
database could inform policy to advance housing stability?
National Evictions Database - HUD's 2021 Report to Congress on the Feasibility of Creating a National
Evictions Database (HUD-PD&R, 2021) discussed existing efforts to collect data on court-ordered and
extra-legal evictions and the additional steps needed to create a national evictions database. The report
acknowledged the need for comprehensive stakeholder engagement on the proposals in the report for
creating such a database. Such stakeholder engagement is also needed to identify the policy value of
creating a database and how the database could be used to advance housing stability. This study would
conduct structured engagement with the following stakeholder groups: federal agencies that have
programs or initiatives related to eviction, court systems, legal services providers, landlords, tenant and
eviction prevention advocacy organizations, and tenants. The engagement would solicit ideas on topics
such as: the program and policy uses of a national evictions database; the types of evictions that should
be included in the database (e.g., court-ordered as well as extra-legal evictions); the specific information
to be collected (e.g., reasons for eviction, landlord and tenant information); what information should be
available to the general public and what should be available for restricted use or shielded from public
view; and risks or potential negative consequences from creating the database. This qualitative study
would identify a broad range of stakeholders to engage, conduct the engagement, document the ideas
59
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
surfaced through the engagement, and synthesize the findings into a report on the policy value of
creating a national evictions database.
What can we learn from the American Housing Survey about how renter and homeowner
decisions are changing in response to climate change?
Climate Driven Disaster Risk and Housing Choices - Climate change may affect renter and homeowner
decisions on where to live, how to remodel their homes, and their preparedness for climate-related
natural disasters, but little is known about how renters and homeowners take into account climate
change in their decision making. Through analysis of data from the 2021 AHS on wildfire risk and future
data collections and analysis on housing-related climate risks and decisions related to those risks, PD&R
seeks to assess the climate change risks facing American households and their responses to these risks.
Through data collection and research, PD&R wants to understand the role, if any, that climate change-
related hazards play in where recent renters and homebuyers decide to live. Do they consider flood risk,
fire hazards, resistance to high winds, durability of building materials and designs, safe rooms or
shelters, cooling and heating costs, home insurance or flood insurance costs, proximity to first
responders, accessibility of the built environment, and reliability of utilities when making their decision
of which unit to rent or purchase? To what extent do homeowners make improvements to their homes
to prepare for, respond to, or prevent damages caused by climate change? Related to climate change
prevention, to what extent do homes in the United States use solar photovoltaio cells and other forms of
renewable energy and to what extent are such energy sources sufficient to meet households' needs.
Related to data collection and research conducted by FEMA, how ready are households to move in
response to climate-related natural disasters? Differences in readiness levels among renters and
homeowners will be further examined. As a first step in this research area, PD&R could pursue research
and analysis of the 2021 AHS module on wildfire risk. This module, developed with input from the
National Fire Prevention Association, will be useful in analyzing housing characteristics that make
housing units vulnerable to wildfires in areas at greater risk of wildfire and in understanding how
households are alerted about wildfires.
As HUD works to test and validate the American Housing Survey Housing Insecurity module, are
there examples or test cases worthy of research for how a housing insecurity index might be
applied?
Housing Insecurity Module Validation and Testing - HUD developed and implemented a housing
insecurity research module as a follow-on to the 2019 AHS, the most comprehensive national housing
survey in the United States. The module was designed to provide data necessary for the construction of
a validated index of housing insecurity suitable for inclusion in a variety of survey and evaluation
instruments. The second phase of the project is assessing the quality of the housing insecurity data
collected in the AHS and analyzing techniques for item reduction and scale development to be used in
building a composite, transferable index. Index options are being tested and analyzed and compared to
contextual questions about stress and basic needs tradeoffs, food security index scores, self-reported
health, and core affordability and quality measures from the AHS. An index of housing insecurity is
expected to capture a broader range of owner and renter households than the worst case needs
60
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
measure, including households that may be experiencing housing instability problems in addition to
those experiencing housing affordability and quality problems. Like HUD's measure of worst-case
housing needs, a final index is expected to allow tracking of housing insecurity trends over time and
disparities across subgroups. Informed by the results of the research, PD&R plans to administer a
reduced set of housing insecurity questions to the full sample of the AHS, re-calibrate housing insecurity
index options through further scale development research, and seek out opportunities to test the index
in other surveys or studies. Throughout the process, PD&R will share results and seek input from OMB,
Interagency partners, and external experts.
What do the next generation surveys on lead hazards and healthy homes tell us?
Comparative Analysis of Healthy Homes Surveys - Nationally representative surveys have provided
important baseline information for understanding environmental health and safety conditions in homes.
This study would summarize and supplement existing research using the National Survey of Lead and
Allergens in Housing (1999), two American Healthy Homes Surveys (2005-2006; 2018-2019), and
healthy housing modules included in the 2011 AHS and 2015 AHS. The integrative work would provide
insights about healthy homes hazards, future surveys, data linkage and research methods, and policy
needs, including applications to HUD's assisted rental programs such as informing future enhancements
to the National Standards for Physical Inspection of Real Estate (NSPIRE).
How could HUD cost-effectively capture data on energy expenditures and energy consumption
for public and assisted housing developments?
Measuring Energy Performance in HUD Project-based Developments - HUD's project-based stock of
assisted housing comprises 2.5 million housing units: 1.4 million units in assisted multifamily programs
and 1.1 million units in the Public Housing program. HUD Program Offices typically do not collect or
maintain an extensive amount of energy cost or consumption data. For PHAs with owner-paid utilities,
annual consumption data are collected on a project-level basis as opposed to the more informative per-
unit or per-building approaches. For Public Housing and assisted multifamily developments that have
units with tenant-paid utilities, energy cost data are collected annually through a utility allowance
schedule, but the data are not verified against actual bills. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has developed a free, industry-standard software tool called Portfolio Manager to help owners
and managers track energy cost and consumption data over time. This pilot project would seek to
deploy Portfolio Manager to enable housing providers to submit energy data in way that supports
quantitative analysis of the energy and financial performance of the insured and assisted properties and
assess the utility of the tool for strengthening the usefulness of energy-related data for project-based
housing programs and ultimately reducing subsidy costs.
Which drivers of customer experience most frequently hinder satisfaction and trust for specific
program services?
Using the Voice of the Customer Tool - In support of Executive Order 13571, "Streamlining Service
Delivery and Improving Customer Service" (EOP, 2011), Office of Management and Budget's Circular A-
11 (OMB, 2019b; see Sec. 280) directs all federal agencies to engage in Customer Experience (CX)
61
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
activities to improve customer service. A key requirement is to establish a mechanism to measure
customer satisfaction with HUD's programs and services on an ongoing basis, which expands on HUD's
past "partner surveys" (HUD, 2011). Under the leadership of the Office of Field Policy and Management,
HUD will establish an agency Listening Practice, which is a strategic policy describing the different ways
information about HUD is conveyed and HUD's plan to adequately survey customers, through active and
passive methods, about CX and public sentiment about HUD's program and services. A robust Listening
Practice will require the acquisition and development of a Voice of the Customer (VOC) Tool to collect
CX data, support CX analysis, and inform future CX initiatives. The VOC tool will help build a demographic
and geographic profile of HUD customers. The hallmark of good VOC tools is the ability to track
customer interactions across traditional communication channels as well as future channels that are in
development, like chat. HUD's VOC tool will measure customer satisfaction by customer type (citizen
customer, facilitator customer, and auxiliary customer) across HUD's five customer service ecosystems.
The overall goal of the tool is to improve customer satisfaction, reduce costs, and facilitate data-driven
decisions on policy and resourcing.
62
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
3. Data Priorities for Evidence Building
Research and data are inextricably linked, because reliable and pertinent data are the foundation for all
research and evidence-based policy. HUD administers a broad range of programs intended to improve
housing and communities across America. To know which of these programs are working well and to
inform policy decisions, it is imperative to have reliable data and contextual evidence.
The preceding subsection, Enhanced Data and Methods, identified numerous priority proposals for
improving data assets. Such initiatives, however, do not detract from the continuing importance of
sustaining existing data collections and organizing and sharing data assets for greater usefulness.
Acquiring and organizing reliable data is an essential part of operating any complex organization,
institution, or economy. Public investments in acquiring and making data available support a vital
economy and more efficient and cost-effective public and private actions. In this way, data serve as
infrastructure, similar to the role of highways, bridges, and public facilities in the physical world. For
these reasons, the status and improvement of the national data infrastructure for housing policy and
research is the focus of this section.
Data Governance
OMB describes the Evidence Act as establishing a new paradigm for enterprise-level data governance by
"calling on agencies to significantly rethink how they currently plan and organize evidence-building, data
management, and data access functions to ensure an integrated and direct connection to data and
evidence needs" (OMB, 2019). The statute requires a new Data Governance Board that comprises the
three newly designated officials-the Chief Data Officer, Evaluation Officer, and Statistical Official-and
other senior managers. The purpose of the Data Governance Board is to set priorities to support
managing data as a strategic asset and answering priority questions laid out in the Learning Agenda. The
Chief Data Officer plays a key coordinating and supporting role in enterprise data governance and
providing open access to data.
Emerging Roles of the Chief Data Officer and the Statistical Official
Appointing a Chief Data Officer (CDO) and a Statistical Official are among the most significant elements
of the Evidence Act. HUD's CDO and Statistical Official are situated, along with the Evaluation Officer, in
PD&R19 to make it the hub for the Department's evidence-building.
In Fiscal Year 2021, Congress funded a new Office of the CDO with 13 new full-time staff that has a
number of important work streams in its early years:
Developing a HUD Enterprise Data Strategy and selecting a data maturity model
Creating a Master Inventory of HUD data assets
Establishing the Data Governance Steering Committee and developing a Data Governance
Program
Building a collaborative environment across program offices by re-establishing the Data
Stewards Advisory Group and strengthening the Analytics Community of Practice
19
HUD's Evidence Act Officials are listed here: https://data.hud.gov/eac.html
63
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Updating HUD's Data Asset Catalog and finalizing an Open Data Plan in compliance with the
Evidence Act
Preparing to comply with the Federal Data Strategy 2020 Action Plan
Managing the Paperwork Reduction Act submissions needed to begin new data collections
The role of the Statistical Official is strongly complementary to that of the CDO and integrates HUD's
existing survey-related work. In the coming years, the Statistical Official will:
Oversee HUD-sponsored survey efforts with the Census Bureau
Support the Evaluation Officer on issues related to protection of confidential data and statistical
efficiency
Support the CDO in developing HUD's Data Asset catalog and implementing Open Data policy
Facilitate collaboration with statistical agencies to create data linkages and develop data
products that are machine-readable and include robust privacy protections
Represent HUD to the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy
Data Resources
Survey Data
The housing surveys that HUD funds represent a crucial part of the nation's housing data infrastructure
and consume the largest share of appropriated funds for Research and Technology.
American Housing Survey (AHS) provides national, regional, and metropolitan area estimates of
the characteristics of the nation's housing stock. Originating in 1973, the statutorily mandated
AHS gathers data biennially across a longitudinal sample of housing units. For 2015, PD&R
worked with the Census Bureau to redesign the survey and draw a new sample of units. The
new survey design includes a rotating panel of question modules that address special topics. The
AHS supports several key PD&R research products: Worst Case Housing Needs reports to
Congress, the Housing Affordability Data System, and the Components of Inventory Change
(CINCH) longitudinal datasets and reports about how uses and costs of housing units change
over time.
Survey of Construction (SOC) provides current national and regional statistics on housing starts,
completions, and size and other characteristics of new, privately owned single-family and
multifamily housing units, as well as sales of new single-family houses. It supports key economic
indicators for the residential construction market, such as PD&R uses in U.S. Housing Market
Conditions and regional and local Comprehensive Housing Market Analyses. 20
Survey of Market Absorption of Apartments (SOMA) supplements the SOC by sampling
residential buildings containing five or more units, and collecting information on amenities,
rents or sales prices, number of units, type of building (including senior housing), and the
number of units rented or sold (absorbed). SOMA provides the key rental market indicator of
20 See https://www.huduser.gov/portal/ushmc/home.html,
64
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
the rate at which new multifamily units are leased up, along with other key estimates of
multifamily housing uptake that are valuable for government and industry.
Manufactured Homes Survey (MHS) is statutorily mandated to produce estimates of the
production, shipments, and placements of manufactured homes for the nation, for each of four
Census regions, and at least annually, for each state. MHS provides estimates by average sales
price, floor area, and unit type, and is used by the public and private sectors to monitor housing
production, affordability, and residential investment.
Rental Housing Finance Survey (RHFS) collects data on the financial, managerial, and physical
characteristics of rental properties nationwide on a biennial basis. First collected in 2012, RHFS
is useful for federal policy and business relating to multifamily housing finance and
management.
American Healthy Homes Survey (AHHS) II was conducted in randomly selected homes
nationwide during 2018-2019 to find out about lead in paint, dust, soil, and water; pesticides
and mold in dust; formaldehyde in air; and safety hazards present. A two-person team of an
Interviewer and a Technician (State-certified as a Lead-Based Paint Inspector and Risk Assessor)
conducted surveys and testing that required 2 to 31/2 hours depending on size of the home. The
first AHHS was conducted in 2005-2006 and the National Survey of Lead and Allergens in
Housing (NSLAH) in 1998-2001. The information obtained from these surveys is important for
tracking national progress in reducing the number of homes with lead-based paint and other
potential health hazards.
Pulse Household Survey was developed by the Census Bureau early in 2020 with substantial
input from HUD and other agencies to track critical information nearly in real time as the COVID-
19 pandemic has evolved. The survey is conducted every few weeks and released about a week
later, so it has provided crucial information about pandemic impacts including financial distress
and housing instability in the form of eviction and foreclosure risk.
Topical Modules in Recent American Housing Surveys
Adding survey modules on special topics leverages the core AHS to provide rich information about the
relationship of cross-cutting policy domains with characteristics of housing units, households, and their
housing finances.
2011-Health and Safety Characteristics, Disabilities and Home Accessibility
2013-Neighborhood Observations, Public Transportation, Neighborhood Social Capital,
Emergency and Disaster Preparedness, Doubled-up Households, Delinquent Payments and
Notices
2015-Health - and Safety Characteristics, Arts and Culture, Housing Counseling, Food Security
2017-Emergency and Disaster Preparedness, Delinquent Payments and Notices, Commuting
Modes and Costs
2019-Food Security, Disabilities and Home Accessibility, Post-Secondary Education Enrollment,
Hurricane Harvey, Housing Insecurity Follow-on Research Survey
2021-Delinquent Payments and Notices, Intent to Move, Wildfire Risk, Pets, Expanded Renter
Housing Search, Smoking Module
65
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Program Demonstration and Evaluation Datasets
Along with HUD's administrative data and market survey data, datasets generated through major
program demonstrations, evaluations, and other data compilations also represent significant public
investments and resources for better understanding and improving housing and community
development policy. High-quality data from random control trials have enduring research value.
Examples include HUD's Moving to Opportunity, Family Options, Rent Reform, and Family Self-
Sufficiency demonstrations. Linking these data assets with external sources creates opportunities to
examine-with minimal expense-research questions that cut across policy domains and involve long-
term outcomes. For example, linkage of MTO data with tax records enabled researchers to estimate the
impact of growing up in quality neighborhoods for children's long-term economic well-being (Chetty et
al. 2016), and then to use the results to validate and make available data on neighborhood opportunity
(Chetty et al., 2020). The section below about HUD's collaboration with the Census Bureau highlights the
research opportunities being made available with demonstration data through the Bureau's Research
Data Centers (RDCs).
Data Compilation Assets
Every year PD&R generates and updates datasets that support resource allocation, targeting, and
planning for Departmental and intergovernmental functions, as well as research in support of program
operations. 21 Program offices also produce administrative data reports for use by partners and
stakeholders.
Fair Market Rents for public and assisted housing programs
Household Income Limits for public and assisted housing programs
Qualified Census Tracts and Difficult Development Areas for the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
HUB Zones for the Small Business Administration
Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) tabulations of American Community
Survey data for communities to develop Consolidated Plans
U.S. Postal Service (USPS) Vacancy Data
Public Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) of tenant data
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit database of projects and tenant characteristics
Picture of Subsidized Households summary tabulations of HUD tenant data across programs
Longitudinal tenant microdata files across programs and multiple years
HUD Enterprise Geographic Information System (HUD eGIS)
Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Data and Mapping Tool (AFFH-T)
Community Assessment Reporting Tool (CART)22
Geocoding Service Center-a PD&R federal shared service that determines addresses and other
geospatial information to enhance administrative and survey records
21 See https://www.huduser.gov/portal/pdrdatas landing.html,
22
See https://egis.hud.gov/cart.
66
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Administrative Data Systems
Several strengths of administrative data make them valuable for evidence-building and research:
Administrative records offer much larger sample sizes for full populations, which support more
compelling research designs and research into important but relatively rare events.
Administrative files often have an inherent longitudinal structure that enables researchers to
follow individuals over time to address important policy questions.
Administrative data may be less likely than survey data to suffer from high and rising rates of
nonresponse, attrition, and underreporting.
Administrative data allow PD&R researchers to conduct robust in-house research to examine
housing programs.
HUD's program offices generate administrative data to operate their programs. Such data constitute an
essential resource for most program evaluations and analytic studies. Core systems for each program
office-selected from more than 200 automated systems in the Department's inventory-include the
following:
Office of Housing
Computerized Homes Underwriting Management System (CHUMS)
Single Family Default Monitoring Subsystem (SFDMS)
Single Family Housing Enterprise Data Warehouse (SFHEDW)
Asset Disposition and Management System (ADAMS)
Single Family Acquired Asset Management System (SAMS)
Tenant Rental Assistance Certification System (TRACS)
Integrated Real Estate Management System (iREMS)
Housing Enterprise Real Estate Management System (HEREMS)
Annual Financial Schedule (AFS; property financial reports)
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA data collected by Consumer Financial Protection Bureau)
Office of Public and Indian Housing
PIH Inventory Management System/Public Housing Information Center (PIH-IMS/PIC) - Tenant
data, physical inspection records, Financial Data Schedule (FDS; PHA financial reports)
Voucher Management System (VMS)
Energy and Performance Information Center (EPIC)
HUD Community Assessment Reporting Tool (CART)
Financial Assessment Subsystem
Management Assessment Subsystem
Physical Assessment Subsystem
Quality Assessment Subsystem
Office of Community Planning and Development
Integrated Disbursement Information System (IDIS)
Disaster Recovery Grants Reporting (DRGR)
Electronic Special Needs Assistance Program System (eSNAPS)
67
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) 23
HUD Environmental Review Online System (HEROS)
Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
HUD Enforcement Management System (HEMS)
Office of Field Policy and Management
Section 3 Performance Evaluation and Assessment System (SPEARS)
Government National Mortgage Association
MyGinnieMae
GinnieNET
Harnessing the power of these administrative data assets through web-based information systems,
geospatial analysis, and linkage with survey data and administrative data from other agencies is the
foundation for the next generation of evidence-based policymaking. Numerous Learning Agenda
questions and proposed projects seek to use these data.
Robust evaluation systems also receive benefits from providing public access to deidentified data and
external researchers' access to confidential microdata on a restricted basis. The federal government is
moving systematically toward open access to public use data through the Data.gov portal. Both public-
use and restricted access forms of HUD administrative data are featured in Learning Agenda projects.
Administrative Data Matching
As a result of increased focus on evidence-based policy making, PD&R has expanded research efforts on
administrative data matching. Administrative matching and data linkage provide crucial evidence to
support policy goals relating to the role of housing in lives and communities.
Linkage with Survey Data
Linking administrative data with survey data is an increasingly important and cost-effective way to
address key research and policy questions for the assisted housing population. Administrative linkages
leverage the value of public investments in survey data. Where some datasets cover one domain deeply
or many topics shallowly, integrated data can fill in knowledge gaps, supporting a comprehensive
understanding of outcomes across different social domains and time periods. Data integration involves
minimal cost to the government and no additional burden either to respondents or program
participants.
24
Researchers now have access to the following survey datasets that include flags for HUD-assisted renter
households based on administrative data:
American Housing Survey (AHS; 2011-2017). The HUD-linked AHS data are available in the
national public use files with a HUDADMIN flag. More complete data are available for restricted
23 HMIS is not a HUD system, but a system that HUD requires Continuum of Care organizations to maintain.
24
See presentation by Melissa Chiu, http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/about/about-the-bureau/adrm/data-
linkage/events/2016-10/CBdatalinkinfra-AEAEval-2016.pdf.
68
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
use. Additionally, "Characteristics of HUD-Assisted Renters and Their Units" reports based on
linked data are available on huduser.gov
American Community Survey (ACS; 2010-2018). In addition to a linkage of assisted households
with ACS microdata that are available on a restricted-use basis at the Census RDC, PD&R has
developed a synthetic HUDADMIN flag that researchers without restricted-use access can use to
develop code with the ACS Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) that can be submitted to HUD
to be run on the restricted-use files. In addition to assisted renters, FHA-insured mortgagors
from HUD's Single Family Data Warehouse have been linked with ACS.25
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS; 1999-2016). These data, which include longitudinal
information for HUD-assisted individuals, are available through the NCHS RDC. NCHS has also
linked the NHIS data with Medicare, Medicaid, and mortality data. HUD-NHIS linkages will be
updated on a 2-year cycle.
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES; 1999-2016). These data, which
include longitudinal information for HUD-assisted individuals, are available through the NCHS
RDC. NCHS has also linked the NHANES data with Medicare, Medicaid, and mortality data. HUD-
NHANES linkages will be updated on a 2-year cycle that aligns with releases of biennial NHANES
surveys.
Current Population Survey (CPS; 2006-2020). With USDA collaboration, a recent data linkage
with the Food Security supplement of the December CPS at the Census Bureau allows HUD to
estimate the level of food insecurity and SNAP food assistance participation among HUD-
assisted households.
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health, 1994-2018). Through a Research
Partnerships grant, University of North Carolina researchers have linked HUD's tenant data with
Add Health, a nationally representative panel survey of adolescents who were in grades 7 to 12
during the 1994-95 school year. The survey was originally designed to assess the effect of
contextual factors on health-promoting and health risk behaviors of adolescents and additional
surveys have added rich data of many types. The linked data are available for researchers
through UNC's Carolina Population Center.
In addition to matching assisted tenant data to surveys, HUD has sponsored linkage of proprietary
CoreLogic data with the AHS. 2013 CoreLogic data were matched to the 2013 AHS to study the feasibility
of using administrative data to replace survey questions or to impute missing data to reduce respondent
burden and improve data quality. Survey responses were validated against variables on local property
tax records including structure type and features, lot size, unit size, year built, year acquired, and
expenses for property tax, sewer, and water. Future work will address open liens and automated
valuation models. Based on this research, the 2015 AHS used public record data for imputation of lot
size and year built.
Linkage with Other Administrative Data
HUD also links its administrative data with administrative data of other agencies:
25 See https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/acs-hud-data-linkage.html
69
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare and Medicaid healthcare utilization data
were successfully linked in a pilot project conducted in collaboration with HHS.
Federal Student Aid. HUD tenant data have been linked with data on Free Application for
Federal Student Aid in several experimental projects to examine the effect of behavioral
nudges26 to improve college application and enrollment of HUD-assisted students.
Administration for Children and Families. HUD tenant data are linked with the National Directory
of New Hires data to examine labor market outcomes.
Internal Revenue Service. HUD's Enterprise Income Verification system uses IRS records to
enable housing providers to verify reported income and ensure correct rental subsidy
calculations. These data are not available for research purposes.
Federal Emergency Management Agency. HUD tenant data are linked with FEMA data to
conduct duplication of benefits checks and facilitate moves into permanent housing. FEMA data
also inform CDBG-DR formula grant allocations and planning for CDBG-DR assisted activities.
Collaboration with the Census Bureau on Administrative Data Linkage
The Census Bureau manages data infrastructure for linking administrative records with Census data and
supporting cutting-edge research of those data. The Bureau assumes responsibility for housing those
data and merging them using addresses or personal identifiers, and facilitates researchers who hold
sworn Census status in obtaining access to the data at 24 Federal Statistical RDCs around the country. 27
RDCs provide data access with information security for research involving personally identifiable
information and other highly sensitive data. Such infrastructure support includes disclosure reviews to
authorized researchers with approved research projects.
HUD has an interagency agreement with the Census Bureau to link data from HUD's tenant databases
and random control trials with the Bureau's survey data collection and other administrative data
collected under its Title 13 authority. Data from HUD's Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment and
Family Options study (FOS) also became available in RDCs in 2017-the first intervention data added to
Federal Statistical RDCs by any federal agency. This data linkage provides an opportunity to build
evidence about such outcomes for HUD-assisted tenants as their health and well-being, financial
circumstances, post-secondary education participation, and wage earning. Formalizing a relationship
with the Census Bureau will allow HUD to engage in a process of knowledge discovery and evidence-
building on critical non-housing outcomes among those housed. Access to these data is restricted to
researchers with Special Sworn Status who have HUD approval. In December 2019, HUD issued a request
for competitive proposals to conduct analysis of HUD's Moving to Opportunity and Family Options Study
datasets at Census Bureau RDCs. 28 Other restricted-access data linkage research efforts highlighted in
this learning agenda involve IRS tax records and Numident mortality records.
26 Nudges are indirect suggestions and positive reinforcement intended to influence behavior and decision making of groups or
individuals without mandates or significant changes in economic incentives.
27
There are 29 Federal Statistical RDCs. See http://www.census.gov/about/adrm/fsrdc/locations.html
 28 See https://www.census.gov/about/adrm/linkage/updates/2019-12-request-for-proposals.html
70
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
HUD and the Census Bureau also are updating the Joint Statistical Project Agreement (JSPA) for a
partnership on research projects that link housing data with non-housing data sources already acquired
by Census. Each organization is committing to partner on up to 4 projects involving a commitment of up
to 1.25 full-time equivalent staff from each organization. Because HUD is a survey sponsor, HUD staff
working on these projects access the linked data remotely through a secured computing environment
within PD&R.
Licensing Administrative Data to External Researchers
Housing market data and program data generated by HUD represent public assets for better housing
and community development policy, provided they are used responsibly and protect personally
identifiable information (PII). PD&R has the authority to enter into Data License Agreements with
research organizations for research projects that inform HUD's policies and programs. Such licenses are
appropriate when (1) important policy-relevant research questions can only be answered by using,
among other resources, PII in HUD's systems and datasets; (2) the research organization can offer
adequate safeguards for the confidentiality of the shared data; (3) the research organization does not
need funding or other resources from HUD to carry out the research project; (4) the research
organization will destroy all PII received from HUD when the license expires. 29
Protecting Privacy through Disclosure Avoidance
HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement (HUD, 2021) provides that HUD-sponsored evaluations must be
conducted in an ethical manner and safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of participants. To
protect the privacy of HUD-assisted households and HUD-insured borrowers, PD&R follows the Rule of
Eleven: disclose no information about any group of individuals or households numbering less than 11,
whether by PD&R staff, contractors, grantees, or licensees. This practice implies that estimates must be
suppressed for smaller subgroups in cells of tables, along with additional subgroups if combinations of
table rows and columns could be used to reidentify a single suppressed cell.
The recent growth of machine learning tools and extensive online data resources has increased the risk
of disclosure in releasing survey or administrative datasets or summary tables. Such changes increase
the concern that simple disclosure avoidance principles such as the Rule of Eleven are not adequate for
protecting privacy. Following a priority established in the 2017 Roadmap, HUD sponsored a "white hat"
test of the robustness of the Rule of Eleven for preventing reidentification of assisted households in
public datasets. The internal study showed that although the Rule of Eleven is quite effective in
preventing disclosure, a small residual risk (less than 1 percent) of potential reidentification remains.
Priority Data Gaps, Needs, and Challenges
Evidence-building needs identified through the stakeholder consultation process point to several
significant deficiencies in data availability for addressing key research questions.
29 See https://www.huduser.gov/portal/research/pdr data-license.html,
71
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Low Income Housing Tax Credit Property Addresses
The lack of building-level addresses for LIHTC properties inhibits HUD's ability to match LIHTC data to
other federal data sources with information about tenants, such the American Community Survey or the
American Housing Survey. Matching to these data sources could provide a valuable picture of the
characteristics and life trajectories of LIHTC tenants. HUD has tried, with minimal success, three
approaches to evaluate current building-level addresses and to increase the number of properties with
building-level addresses. These data could help researchers better understand where LIHTC fits within
broader placed-based policy discussions, for example whether these units are being built in areas of
opportunity or in areas of concentrated poverty. To resolve this problem, HUD has, in recent years,
proposed to Congress that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) should be authorized to share building
addresses-a type of protected federal tax information-witl HUD for statistical purposes, reflecting
HUD's interest in the performance of the largest federal housing production program.
Opportunity Zones Investments, Activities, and Outputs
Restrictions on disclosure of tax information pose a significant risk for achieving a reliable evidence basis
to inform policy for the substantial public tax expenditure of capital gains deductibility for qualified OZ
investments. HUD has determined that, similar to LIHTC data sharing by IRS, Congressional authorization
may be needed for IRS to share federal tax information about Opportunity Funds and OZs with HUD for
statistical purposes.
Post-exit Outcomes of Assisted Renters
Several research priorities identified in the Learning Agenda relate to improving understanding of how
HUD's housing programs contribute to tenants' economic opportunities and long-term well-being that
shape whether exits can be considered "positive." As described in this Learning Agenda's research
proposals, HUD seeks to leverage research to inform potential enhancements of tenant data systems to
capture information about tenant conditions at the point of exit.
Usability of IDIS Data for Research
A long-term challenge associated with block grant programs in general, and especially with community-
serving activities, is using available data to both conduct monitoring of financial operations and to gather
more detail on the outputs and outcomes of these programs. An initial significant step would be
improving the reliability of data on where certain activities are taking place, so as to better understand
which neighborhoods and households benefit from the funding. Activities conducted by subgrantees
frequently are represented in the IDIS system by the addresses of the subgrantees' office rather the
address of the activity. Further, activities such as Community Development Block Grant-funded
streetscape improvements may cover multiple blocks. Lack of specific address information limits
understanding of an activity's impact and consistency with civil rights requirements. Other changes,
including more detailed demographic information of recipients of funds through certain activities - e.g.
HOME Tenant-Based Rental Assistance - could provide valuable information on the equity and efficacy
of HUD's major block grant programs.
72
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Energy Consumption and Expenditure Data for Public and Assisted Housing
HUD's annual expenditure for energy and utilities in housing programs is estimated at $6.4 billion (HUD,
2016). Detailed information needed to identify opportunities for greater efficiency across the programs
is lacking because utility metering may occur at various levels of developments, buildings, and units.
Lead Hazard Control Administrative Data
As part of the mandate of the federal Open Data Policy and Evidence Act to make data open by default,
a key opportunity that HUD has identified is the administrative data for the Lead Hazard Control grant
program. Following resolution of issues of data quality and confidentiality, these data potentially have
evidence-building applications related to linkage with CDC neighborhood-leve risk estimates of elevated
blood lead in children or with HUD's existing geospatial lead targeting tools.
Picture of Single-Family FHA-insured Households
The FHA is a key source of financing for first-time and minority homebuyers. Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act reporting provides important information on new loan originations, yet there is not a comprehensive
publicly available dataset on FHA mortgagors, loan performance, and portfolio characteristics for
summary geographies. HUD's Picture of Subsidized Households has, for two decades, provided
accessible summary data for HUD's public and assisted housing programs. Picture's use of sums and
averages for various programs, geographies, and partner types-with suppression, when needed-
eliminates the confidentiality risks inherent to administrative microdata. A team of PD&R, FHA, and
Office of the Chief Data Officer experts could collaborate to design a similar data asset for FHA's single-
family mortgage insurance programs that will be useful for analyzing program characteristics.
Aggregated data elements might include, for example, average household income, age groups,
household size, race, mortgage characteristics, first-time homebuyers, housing unit type, and
neighborhood characteristics including underserved neighborhoods.
PHA Waiting Lists and Preferences
Housing Assistance is not an entitlement: as such only around one in four eligible households receives
assistance from HUD. To manage scarce housing resources PHAs that have more applicants than
vouchers or units available establish wait lists. Additionally, households often do not simply come off
their respective wait lists in the order they enrolled, as PHAs commonly establish preferences for
household characteristics - such as families with children, seniors, individuals with disabilities, or people
experiencing homelessness - that can allow certain households assistance sooner. PD&R published a
study in 2014 focused specifically on efforts by PHAs to serve homeless households with mainstream
housing assistance resources that also served as snapshot of the varied approaches to preferences
(Khadduri et al., 2014). More work is needed to document on a regular basis the open/closed status of
PHA waitlists nationally and what kinds of preferences PHAs are employing in order to meet the needs
of the communities they serve.
73
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data
Valid, reliable, and nationally representative data on the housing conditions of LGBTQ+ individuals are
essential to HUD's goal of ensuring equitable housing opportunities regardless of sexual orientation and
gender identity. To promote greater equity in the housing market for underserved communities, HUD
and Census could partner to collect more data to understand the unique barriers that members of
underserved communities face in accessing and staying in decent and affordable housing in opportunity
neighborhoods, especially in terms of gender identity and sexual orientation where substantial data gaps
exist. To this end, PD&R is pursuing research on the development of self-report and proxy questions for
measurement of sexual orientation and gender identity of household members and evaluating the
feasibility of adding the questions to the American Housing Survey.
Methods for Evidence-Building
The Evidence Act requires learning agendas to include a list of methodologies to be employed for
evidence-building. Most such methodologies are types of evaluation, which OMB defines as "an
assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of one or more programs, policies, and
organizations intended to assess their effectiveness and efficiency."30
HUD's Evaluation Policy Statement (HUD, 2021) specifies that program evaluations will be conducted
using the most rigorous methods appropriate for the research question. The selection of appropriate
methods for any given research effort depends on factors including cost, feasibility, and the strength of
the existing evidence basis in the research literature. Many HUD evaluations employ mixed-methods
approaches to approach research questions more completely using complementary tools.
The primary methods employed for program evaluation are described below. Other methods are used to
build evidence without formal program evaluation, such as analytic tools used for performance
monitoring or focused policy studies.
Program Demonstrations
Program demonstrations are ways to try out program or policy innovations in a way that generates
rigorous evidence about whether they work. Demonstrations often utilize random control trials that
have both treatment and control groups to ensure that evaluations can attribute program effects
reliably to the intervention rather than to differences in participants, in which some choose (or avoid)
the treatment. Randomization of persons, households, buildings, or entities in sufficient numbers and
faithful application of treatment as assigned should yield reliable information on program impacts. HUD
has a number of notable examples of program demonstrations that used random assignment:31
Housing Allowance Demonstration-1970s-era test of the tenant-based rental assistance model
that later became HUD's Housing Choice Voucher program.
30 See OMB M-20-12, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/M-20-12.pdf.
31 Research reports and information about the status of ongoing demonstrations are available on HUDUSER.gov.
74
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Moving to Opportunity (MTO) Demonstration-Tria of whether better neighborhoods accessed
through special tenant-based vouchers that must be used in low-poverty areas and housing
counseling produce better tenant outcomes than public housing or regular vouchers.
Family Options Demonstration-Experimen - to test long-term outcomes of four housing or
service interventions for formerly homeless families with children.
Rent Reform Demonstration-Tests the effect of alternative HCV rent policies on households'
labor market and housing-related outcomes, receipt of other government benefits, and use of
homelessness services.
Integrated Wellness in Supportive Housing (IWISH) Demonstration-Trial - of whether housing
with supportive services for low-income elderly residents can improve housing stability,
wellbeing, and health outcomes and reduce unnecessary healthcare utilization.
Family Self-Sufficiency Demonstration-Trial of the impact of HUD's primary self-sufficiency
program on tenants.
Quasi-Experimental Evaluations
When random assignment is not feasible, quasi-experimental methods provide an alternative way to
provide a counterfactual for estimating the effects of an intervention. Natural experiments, propensity
matching, or instrumental variables in theory-guided econometric models are used to infer causal
relationships.
For example, the evaluation of the Rental Assistance Demonstration created project-level matches
based on ex ante project characteristics in assessing whether the conversion of public housing to private
subsidized housing had improved the physical conditions and stabilized the finances of the
developments.
Process or Implementation Analysis
This type of study uses administrative data, direct observation, and interviews with participants to
determine whether a program is being implemented as envisioned by its creators, and whether the
program, as envisioned and implemented, is capable of delivering positive outcomes.
Program evaluations have a range of purposes, from assessing a program's implementation or process,
to its outcomes, its impacts, and costs-benefits. Program evaluation often begins with a logic model to
articulate the mechanisms by which the resource inputs are expected to result in the desired impacts.
Evaluations of HUD programs are most often conducted by external contract researchers, although in-
house staff may conduct preliminary or smaller-scope evaluations. Many evaluations employ
econometric and descriptive statistical methods. It is often useful to conduct an evaluability assessment
of a program to characterize its objectives, logic, and activities and investigate evaluation options before
undertaking a formal program evaluation.
Econometric Analysis
Econometric analysis is the use of theory-guided econometric models, often multiple regression models,
to identify the parameters affecting a dependent variable and infer causal relationships by controlling
75
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
for confounding factors while the treatment variable varies. Econometric analysis is frequently an
important component of PD&R's regulatory impact analysis of proposed regulations.
Descriptive Statistical Analysis
Descriptive statistical analysis is the estimation (tabulation) of summary statistics to characterize the
cases in a sample dataset. Descriptive statistics often focus on quantifying the proportions of various
characteristics, major subgroups in the sample, and the shape of the distribution. The use of descriptive
statistics does not focus on inferring causal relationships or generalizability of the sample to the total
population but is often helpful in such research. Descriptive analysis is frequently used with HUD
administrative data to develop an understanding of characteristics of program participants and changes
over time that may be important to monitor.
Case Studies
The case study method is a form of in depth, qualitative, descriptive research of a single subject or small
group of subjects. The method generally draws conclusions only about the studied subject and within
the given context yet is often valuable for theory building and developing awareness of institutional
factors that affect outcomes. Case studies are useful to HUD for examining program implementation
within a handful of communities, as a complementary element of broader, quantitative evaluation.
Ethnography
The ethnographic method is a type of qualitative, in-the-field research that provides holistic, detailed
information on participant experiences of social, cultural, and economic processes. The method relies
heavily on documenting observations of participant interactions and in depth participant interviews.
Literature Reviews and Systematic Reviews
Literature reviews are summaries of the state of knowledge in a research area based on secondary
sources. Literature reviews include substantive findings and theoretical and methodological
contributions to the topic, and thus serve as the foundation for many evaluations and studies. A
systematic review is a type of literature review that seeks to identify, appraise, and synthesize all high-
quality research evidence on a given research question.
Performance Metrics and Dashboards
Performance metrics are a type of program monitoring, often using administrative data tabulated in
specific ways to support regular, periodic measurement of key aspects of program performance in
support of progress monitoring and early intervention to improve operations and results. HUD uses
selected performance metrics for internal dashboards for internal cross-cutting reviews, public reporting
of progress on Agency Priority Goals, and annual performance reporting under the Government
Performance and Results Act Modernization Act.
It is useful to distinguish performance indicators, which are tied to program objectives, from risk
indicators that are used to mitigate program risks not directly associated with outcomes. Both types of
indicators may be useful in dashboards.
76
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Surveys
The federal statistical system relies extensively on the use of sample surveys to cost-effectively compile
statistically representative information about individuals, households, and firms (and in the case of the
American Housing Survey, housing units). HUD sponsors several surveys, discussed in Section 3, and
frequently uses repeated surveys of participants in program evaluations to determine their baseline
conditions and subsequent outcomes. Surveys may also be used to obtain reliable information about
conditions in shorter-term research studies. The Paperwork Reduction Act requires federal agencies to
obtain approval from the OMB for collections of information, which generally requires publication of
notices in the Federal Register, a public comment period, and OMB review of any survey instrument to
be administered to more than nine respondents. This process can introduce substantial delays of data
collection efforts. Under Executive Order 12862, OMB provides for a simplified generic clearance for
customer satisfaction surveys.
32
Advanced Analytics
Advanced analytics such as machine learning techniques are increasingly recognized as an important
way to use unstructured data more effectively and detect hidden patterns in large datasets. Such
methods can generate predictive algorithms so that problems can be anticipated and addressed
proactively. HUD's vision for advanced analytics is to advance to higher levels of analytics maturity, from
Stage 1 Descriptive capability through Diagnostic, Predictive, and Prescriptive capacity (HUD, 2019b;
2019c).
With the help of an Innovation grant from the Department of Treasury, HUD's Office of Risk
Management and Assessment is using computational linguistics, machine learning, and sentiment
analysis to better understand risk factors for grant programs and contracts based on keywords identified
by subject matter experts. The tools are being used to examine Single Audit documents submitted in
accordance with 2 CFR Part 200, Subpart F to detect patterns that signal potential problems and
opportunities for increased oversight and technical assistance through ongoing Streamlined Risk
Analysis. 33
PD&R and Census Bureau staff also collaborated on a machine learning study based on data from an AHS
2017 question about how respondents classify their neighborhood-urban, suburban, or rural. The
method was used to predict how out-of-sample households would classify their neighborhoods and,
thereby, create the Urbanization Perceptions Small Area Index (UPSAI). Such data have value for
validating federal geographic classifications and numerous other research and policy applications
(Bucholtz et al., 2020).
32 See https://www2.usgs.gov/customer/page9.html. Executive Order 12862 is found at https://www.archives.gov/files/federal-
gister/executive-orders/pdf/12862.pdf.
33 See https://fmvision.fiscal.treasury.gov/transformation-stories.html.
77
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Behaviorally Informed Program Innovation
In recent years, social sciences such as sociology and economics increasingly have been informed by
behavioral sciences such as psychology, social neuroscience, and cognitive science. Reflecting a
perspective more than a method, this interdisciplinary work has had important implications for policy
and has drawn attention to the potential importance of such policy levers as nudges, default choices,
and increasing the availability and salience of clear and relevant information. In recent years, HUD has
collaborated with the General Services Administration (GSA) Office of Evaluation Sciences on evidence-
based behavioral interventions. Several of these efforts involved low-cost rapid experiments to improve
the rate of completion of the Department of Education's Free Application for Federal Student Aid
(FAFSA) student aid applications by HUD-assisted young adults.
Barriers to Evidence-Building
Another essential element of a learning agenda as envisioned by the Evidence Act is a list of barriers to
evidence-building. Concurrently with development of this Learning Agenda, HUD developed a Capacity
Assessment for Research, Evaluation, Statistics, and Analysis. This assessment, a parallel requirement of
the Evidence Act, seeks to systematically assess evidence-building capacity, maturity, and barriers. The
Capacity Assessment draws on a 2020 HUD-administered key informant survey of HUD's senior
managers and the GAO's 2020 Federal Managers' Survey and is being published concurrently with this
Learning Agenda and HUD's Strategic Plan Fiscal Year 2022-2026.
Gaps in Data Quality and Access
Program monitoring, evaluations, and research frequently are compromised by a lack of sufficiently
detailed, accurate, and complete data.
Individual programs may not collect sufficiently detailed administrative data if they lack
statutory authority or if the reporting burden would be too great for program partners.
Administrative data (for example, tenant data from the forms HUD-50058 and HUD-50059) are
prone to errors arising from misunderstandings of how to enter information and other human
errors. Notably, the definition of disability used in these forms is inconsistent with the definition
in the Fair Housing Act, Section 504, and the Americans with Disabilities Act, which may
contribute to housing providers not complying with federal accessibility requirements and a lack
of consistent data.
Data accuracy and completeness can be compromised by insufficient funding to implement edits
so that automated systems reject invalid or incomplete entries.
Data quality errors also compromise efforts to match data with other sources, especially when
matching relies on addresses or other text fields.
Data quality problems arising from human errors could be reduced by the use of cognitive
interview methods such as those used to develop survey instruments. Better understanding of
the process and thought patterns involved in completing forms might lead to streamlined
content, a simpler process, or clearer instructions.
78
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Access to data within programmatic silos can be hindered by the effort needed to collect and
integrate them across the HUD enterprise.34
A lack of flexibility, responsiveness, and dynamism in HUD's data collection capacity sometimes
causes the Department to miss evidence-gathering opportunities that are present only briefly,
such as in the aftermath of a disaster.35
Several key examples of data gaps hindering evidence-building are discussed in Section 3 under Data
Collection Needs and Challenges.
Insufficient and Variable Research Funding
In past decades, appropriators and other policymakers have provided inconsistent and relatively low
levels of support for program evaluations. Advocates for good government such as the Results for
America Foundation have suggested that an appropriate level for funding research and evaluation is
about 1 percent of program funding. Funding levels for HUD's Research and Technology account
generally are less than one-quarter of 1 percent of HUD program funding levels. At such levels, it will not
be feasible for HUD to address all the priority research questions identified in this Learning Agenda or
fully evaluate major taxpayer-funded programs.
Procurement Capacity
Successful contracting for high-quality research services requires, in addition to employing sufficient
subject matter experts, contracting processes and officials that support timely selection of the most
qualified research groups. Contracting officials generally are selected for skills in avoiding risk to the
government and procuring services at reasonable cost, and not for understanding research and
evaluation methods or program subject matter. Research procurements that result in contract
personnel that lack methodological or subject matter expertise pertaining to a specific research topic
increase the risk of research failure.
Lag Time for Rigorous Evidence
The outcomes and impacts of public programs may not be fully manifested for several years- or even
decades, as children mature to adulthood shaped by HUD-assisted housing environments. Because of
this time lag, carefully structured evaluations may take a year or more to design and multiple years to
complete, with results assessed in interim and final evaluation phases. Although program evaluation is
crucial for evaluation-based policymaking and public accountability, such distant horizons are not helpful
for policymakers who want to know, for example, whether program A or program B is the more effective
option in the next funding cycle. In such cases, discrete policy studies, performance data, and formal
retrospective analyses can help fill the gap.
34 PD&R developed a tenant data server to address this challenge. The server supports such accessible tools as skillets,
longitudinal data files, and geospatial data for eGIS and CART, but it is not mature yet. The Master Data Management concept is
expected to be a key solution for enterprise-level analytics and reporting as well as standardization of some measures.
35 The OMB approval process for proposed information collections under the Paperwork Reduction Act represents a statutory
barrier to some opportunistic data gathering.
79
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Evaluability
To evaluate whether a program achieves its objectives, it is important to have clarity about what the
objectives are and whether program activities are logically linked to those objectives. Some major HUD
programs represent funding streams that do not prescribe the type of activity being funded. The CDBG
program is a prime example, as grantees have discretion to pursue dozens of eligible activities, reflected
by more than 100 activity codes in the administrative data system. 36 The Government Accountability
Office (2012) has documented this challenge for block grant programs. Self-funded programs such as
FHA's mortgage insurance funds can pose difficulties for evaluation due to uncertainty about the level of
resources used, as annual appropriations bills provide commitment authority that establishes a ceiling
on long-term insured losses rather than providing budget authority.
Constraints on Rigorous Methods
Rigorous program evaluation often requires conducting random control trials in which study subjects are
randomly assigned to either a treatment group or a control group. Such experimental methods enable
evaluators to ensure that results are externally representative because there is no opportunity for
results to be influenced by different personal characteristics of the people who chose treatment.
Random control trials, however, are not always feasible for public programs. Policymakers may wish to
ensure that no one is excluded from receiving the program's treatment, even though its effectiveness is
not fully known. In such cases, evaluators may choose quasi-experimental methods in which treatment
is allocated by an external mechanism such as a cutoff score, propensity matching, or instrumental
variables rather than through random assignment. Quasi-experimental methods may not support
definitive statements about causality where confounding factors are present.
Data Governance and Enterprise Data Management
The data governance structures created by the Evidence Act will intersect in important ways with
existing data collection through administrative, survey-based, or evaluation-based mechanisms, as well
as with information technology requirements under the authority of the Chief Information Officer.
Aligning data ownership, authorities, responsibilities, and resources with identified data priorities has
potential to pose challenges across the Department that the Chief Data Officer will take the lead in
addressing in collaboration with program offices (HUD, 2019c).
Privacy Concerns
Awareness is increasing of the potential for households or individuals represented in statistical
summaries of program or survey data to be re-identified in the absence of personally identifiable
information (PII). The growing use of machine learning methods and the potential to match publicly
available data with the enormous datasets of detailed personal information compiled by the private
sector increases such privacy risks. Such risks are likely to result in federal data assets becoming less
accessible and less useful to analysts who lack access to restricted data. For example, as the Census
36
Eligible CDBG activities are defined in 24 CFR Part 570. Activity codes for reporting purposes are listed in
 https://files.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/Matrix-Code-Definitions.pdf.
80
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Bureau adopts more rigorous differential privacy practices, publicly available data assets such as user-
defined tables created with the American Housing Survey Table Creator have been subjected to greater
amounts of data suppression so that output is mostly blank for some smaller population subgroups and
lower-frequency data attributes.
Alignment of Evaluation Evidence and Performance Data with Program Management
The Evidence Act envisions an agency-wide view of evidence-building through evaluation, data
collection, and analysis, and requires an Evaluation Officer to oversee the agency's evaluation portfolio.
As several HUD program offices have their own components for evaluation, policy development, and
data collection, potential silos will need to be bridged with a systematic evidence framework and data
governance. In 2020, HUD is taking a first step toward better understanding the nature of such barriers
through the learning agenda development and Capacity Assessment processes.
81
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
4. Implementing the Learning Agenda
This section discusses issues and necessary steps for developing this Learning Agenda consistent with
the Evidence Act. These include specific requirements of the Evidence Act, discussion of available
resources, and functional means of undertaking the proposed priorities.
Documenting New and Ongoing Evaluation Activities
Prior to the Evidence Act, HUD traditionally developed an evaluation plan each year as part of the
budget development process for the Research and Technology account for the Office of Policy
Development and Research and shared the plan with Congressional appropriators. Such evaluation plans
have been limited to significant studies requiring appropriated funds, for example, contract research,
competitive research grants, and Research Partnerships. As provided by the Evidence Act, HUD has
expanded these Congressional submissions into Annual Evaluation Plans that are aligned and released
with HUD's Annual Performance Plan.
Selection of significant studies for the Annual Evaluation Plan includes significant evaluation activities
launching that year that 1) align with the long-term, strategic learning agenda of this Learning Agenda or
2) address emerging needs of policymakers and program officials in an appropriately responsive way.
The Learning Agenda provides an important filter for significant studies to include in annual evaluation
plans based on the Learning Agenda's criteria of policy relevance, timeliness and tractability, and using
HUD's comparative advantage effectively.
Assessing and Increasing Evidence-Building Capacity
In addition to developing learning agendas, the Evidence Act requires agencies to conduct Capacity
Assessments. A Capacity Assessment is a part of agencies' strategic plans that assesses their "ability and
infrastructure to carry out evidence-building activities like foundational fact finding, performance
measurement, policy analysis, and program evaluation" (OMB, 2019a).
Such assessments of agencies' ability to generate, analyze, and use evidence to strengthen policy and
practice have potential to strongly complement the strategic evidence-building direction of a learning
agenda by describing the foundation and needed enhancements for effectively using the evidence. HUD
drew on a PD&R-administered key informant survey of HUD's senior managers in 2020 and the GAO's
2020 Federal Managers' Survey to produce its first Capacity Assessment for Research, Evaluation,
Statistics, and Analysis, published concurrently with this Learning Agenda and HUD's Strategic Plan Fiscal
Year 2022-2026. Subsequent capacity assessments will further explore the issues identified in the first
phase and surface other issues that may have arisen since.
Resources for Implementing the Research Agenda
Financing the Research Agenda
HUD'S primary source of funding for research and evaluation is PD&R's Research and Technology (R&T)
account. Core R&T funding also provides the nation's basic infrastructure of housing data and research,
through regular surveys, data compilation of HUD's administrative data across all of HUD's programs,
82
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
core research and evaluation in the areas of housing and community development, and public
dissemination of the data and research. A substantial third portion of the R&T account funds Technical
Assistance to HUD's program partners, some of which represents another form of research
dissemination. Congressional justifications for the annual President's Budget requests for R&T (and
other accounts) are released by HUD's Chief Financial Officer. 37
In-house research activities carried out by PD&R staff (with Salaries & Expenses funding) provide an
important complement to contracted research. In-house research often has a narrower scope but can be
invaluable in responding quickly to emerging policy questions and shaping more capital-intensive
research efforts. A number of research proposals in this Learning Agenda are envisioned as in-house
research.
External Resources
Partnerships with philanthropies, academic institutions, and research organizations provide another
potential source of funding for the research projects. In 2012, Congress authorized PD&R to enter into
unsolicited, noncompetitive cooperative agreements with potential research partners. This authority
allows PD&R to participate in innovative research projects that inform HUD's policies and programs.
PD&R Research Partnerships create leverage for federal investments by requiring a 50-percent cost
share from philanthropic organizations, other governmental agencies, or a combination of these
entities.38
HUD also collaborates with philanthropic partners in other ways. PD&R's division of International and
Philanthropic Affairs strengthens connections with philanthropic research and innovation to identify and
disseminate best practices through learning exchanges with U.S. and international partners. The funds
leveraged in this way provide a welcome complement to HUD resources outlined in this Learning
Agenda. As significant research findings emerge from both PD&R-funded and philanthropic research
initiatives, this public-private collaboration will accelerate progress in improving policy and program
effectiveness.
Innovative HUD Research Mechanisms
In the effort to use research resources most effectively, HUD has initiated several efforts to improve
research effectiveness:
Research NOFO. HUD's Research Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) encourages a
collaborative partnership to undertake research projects that will have great value for the
housing and community development fields. NOFOs permit external partners and researchers to
enter into a cooperative agreement to address some of HUD's most pressing research needs,
but do not require unsolicited proposals or cost sharing as Research Partnerships do. Rather, the
NOFO approach involves substantial negotiation between HUD and the selected research teams
to ensure that the research successfully answers the questions posed in the NOFO, produces
37
HUD's Congressional Justifications for Fiscal Year 2022 are found at https://www.hud.gov/ci
38
http://www.huduser.org/portal/research/pdrrespartnerships about.hti
83
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
high-quality research products, and generates datasets that are available for use by other
researchers.
The NOFO process shares the strength of a competitive contracting approach in ensuring that
the most qualified research organizations are engaged. NOFO applicants must meet the specific
requirements and qualifications specified in the NOFO, including expertise in housing and
service programs for low-income persons in general, the specific HUD programs and activities to
be studied, and the specific research methods needed to undertake the study. A crucial
advantage of the NOFO approach is that it enables the organizations to be pre-qualified before
they undertake the costly process of developing a specific research approach in response to a
statement of work.
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Research Center of Excellence. In Fiscal Year
2021, HUD launched an initiative designed to conduct research projects enabling the
establishment of up to two HBCU Center(s) of Excellence to (COE). The research projects are
intended to initiate an ongoing series of reports focused on housing, community, and economic
development in underserved communities that can serve as national, local, or regional
benchmarks and assist in support of COE(s) that expand the housing and community
development research efforts at HBCUs. The purpose of the COE is to conduct innovative
research of housing and economic development topics that include but are not limited to home
ownership, the production and availability of affordable housing, neighborhood distress
including abandoned or low-quality housing issues, housing shortage including issues of
overcrowding and/or homelessness, and related issues. The COE should take a multidisciplinary
approach to housing and community development research, and aim to influence policy at the
local, state, and national levels.
Multidisciplinary Research Team (MDRT). The MDRT, established in Fiscal Year 2013, has
proven a highly effective mechanism for engaging experts in conducting rapid-response research
projects. PD&R established a blanket purchase agreement with a research services firm to
assemble a nimble team of researchers for each task. HUD issues task orders relating to policy
questions requiring quick-turnaround research, typically using HUD administrative data or other
publicly available data sources, and the contractor offers proposals responding to the task
order.
In-house Research and Interagency Collaborations
PD&R staff possesses extensive housing-related experience, advanced degrees, and research skills that
enable in-house research as well as technical monitoring of contract research. In-house research and
deep knowledge of HUD administrative data and survey datasets create valuable opportunities to
collaborate with colleagues in federal sister agencies on policy-relevant research that spans agency
cylinders. Several staff collaborations are discussed in this Learning Agenda in connection with proposed
research projects and data infrastructure.
84
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Appendix A. How this Learning Agenda was Developed
Housing and community development research is too complex and too important to permit PD&R, HUD,
and our partners to attain effective, evidence-based policy in an unplanned or uncoordinated way.
PD&R's Evidence Officer and Statistical Official collaborate closely with the Chief Data Officer to provide
leadership in implementing the Evidence Act and building evidence to support better housing and urban
development policy.
A key element of the Learning Agenda process is engaging stakeholders in identifying research questions
that are timely and relevant for HUD's mission, programs, and policy role. This focus on research
questions, endorsed by the Evidence Act, is distinct from a conventional quest for research project ideas.
A small team of PD&R staff coordinated the Learning Agenda development process through five steps:
Collect ideas and research questions
Compile and organize research questions and projects
Prioritize research questions and projects
Develop project proposal summaries
Combine research priorities with complementary information required for Learning Agendas
Each step is described briefly below.
Collect Ideas and Research Questions
To solicit a wide range of views and suggestions, PD&R's Learning Agenda team again engaged with
internal and external stakeholders during Fiscal Year 2021 using a variety of methods:
1. An email outreach to federal evaluators and policy experts solicited suggestions in program and
policy domains that overlap with HUD's mission.
2.
An electronic mailbox devoted to the Learning Agenda remains open for ongoing suggestions
about important research questions on any HUD-related topic:
HUDLearningAgenda@huduser.gov.
3. Listening sessions were held with HUD program offices, PD&R staff, external federal
stakeholders, and people with lived experience with HUD programs. 39
Through these sources, the Learning Agenda team recorded hundreds of suggestions from internal and
external stakeholders and entered them into a database. Comments were identified by the session or
medium in which they were received, but individual commenters remain anonymous.
Compile and Organize Research Questions and Projects
The Learning Agenda team compiled a database of the suggestions from stakeholders. Research
questions were classified primarily in two ways:
39 Listening sessions have repeatedly proven to be the most productive means of generating thoughtful research suggestions,
probably because they provide opportunity for dialogue. HUD is considering opportunities to facilitate such sessions more
efficiently in the future through the use of technology.
85
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
New research questions-Foremost PD&R sought suggestions from participants about new
important research questions to address during the next 5 years.
Research Questions from the Research Roadmap-Some questions were derived from
existing proposals on the Research Roadmap: 2020 Update. Some questions incorporate
substantial changes while others use the same content that was submitted as the
Department's Interim Learning Agenda.
The team classified the suggestions into 11 policy topics to help PD&R prioritize the questions:
1. Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
2.
Core Housing Programs
3.
Disaster Recovery Energy and Climate Change
4. Fair Housing
5. Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
6. Housing and Health
7.
Indian and Tribal Issues
8. Self-sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
9. Homeownership
10. Vulnerable and Special Populations
11. Enhanced Data and Methods
Prioritize Research Questions and Projects
The Learning Agenda gave PD&R staff the opportunity to weigh in on the suggested research questions.
Staff collectively assessed the value and viability of the collection of proposed research questions and
developed a list of questions that were worth pursuing. PD&R's leadership and management team
reviewed and discussed that list of questions and developed a priority list of research questions and
project suggestions to be assigned to subject matter experts (SMEs) for proposal development.
Develop Project Proposal Summaries
The Learning Agenda SMEs developed project proposal summaries for each prioritized research question
using a standard template. The resulting project proposal summaries accompany each research question
in the body of the Learning Agenda.
Combine Research Priorities with Complementary Information Required for Learning Agendas
The priority research questions represent only one component of a learning agenda as prescribed by the
Evidence Act and OMB. The team assembled additional material on Data Needs, Methods for Evidence-
Building, Barriers to Evidence-Building, and Implementation to complete the Learning Agenda.
86
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Appendix B. List of Learning Questions by Policy Topic
Policy Topics, Foundational Learning Questions, and Priority Research Questions
Community Development and Place-based Initiatives
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy most effectively support equitable place-building,
community development, and quality of life improvements in American communities?
Priority Research Questions:
What were the outcomes of the Choice Neighborhoods program for both residents and the communities in
which it was implemented?
How effective are CDBG economic development activities across different community types and program
approaches?
To what extent does CDBG investment benefit low-and moderate-income persons and individuals who are
members of protected class groups or underserved communities?
How are CDBG grantees using the Section 108 loan guarantee program to support innovative affordable
housing and economic development models?
How can HUD support and increase access to healthy environments in communities through assets
connected to place-based investments?
To what extent can technical assistance build capacity and improve financial management of distressed
local governments?
How effective are homeowner rehabilitation programs at improving individual quality of life and what
effect do they have on neighborhood quality?
How much affordable housing is created within Opportunity Zones, and what is the broader change in
housing affordability in those areas?
What has been the impact of the HOPE VI Urban Revitalization program over 20 years?
What are the personal reasons, outcomes, and destinations of households who leave gentrifying
neighborhoods? What motivations and perceptions of neighborhood change influence the choices of
leavers and stayers?
What are the housing needs of agricultural workers?
Core Housing Programs
Foundational Learning Question: How can HUD most effectively meet needs for high-quality, rent-assisted
housing that supports housing security and economic advancement?
Priority Research Questions:
What are the best most effective ways of engaging with and attracting landlords to the voucher program?
What would change if tenant-based rental assistance programs made payments directly to tenants?
What would it take to improve accessibility in the assisted housing stock, including public housing and
privately owned multifamily housing?
How does housing quality affect assisted housing tenure, employment, and quality of life outcomes of
public housing and HCV tenants?
What are the tenant, neighborhood, and PHA outcomes associated with the implementation of Small Area
FMRs?
What are the barriers to applying for federal housing assistance, especially for individuals who are members
of protected class groups or underserved communities, and would tools that facilitate applying for housing
assistance address them? What is the pattern and distribution of voucher portability in the Housing Choice
Voucher Program?
87
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Policy Topics, Foundational Learning Questions, and Priority Research Questions
How can HUD better support students in post-secondary education who are at risk of housing insecurity
and homelessness?
What are the pros and cons of updating utility allowances through energy consumption modeling rather
than relying on actual utility data in multifamily properties?
How do energy standards affect the long-term viability of RAD conversions?
How are PHAs implementing the Project-Based Voucher program?
Is the Project-Based Voucher program benefiting HUD's target populations and do underserved
communities have equitable access to the program?
What are the long-term social and economic outcomes of persons who have exited public and assisted
housing?
Disaster Recovery, Energy, and Climate Change
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy and funding best support disaster recovery, climate
resilience, and sustainability and strengthen environmental justice?
Priority Research Questions:
Does HUD need to modify the CDBG-DR allocation process to account for new needs related to climate
change?
How do the impacts, costs, and resulting needs of slow-onset disasters compare with those of declared
disasters, and what are implications for slow-onset disaster declarations, recovery aid programs, and HUD
allocation formulas?
What HUD-assisted properties are repeatedly harmed by or at increasing risk of disasters and what is the
cost to HUD? What are risks to HUD-assisted and other vulnerable populations?
What enhancements to disaster-related data collection and data sharing between agencies are needed to
improve coordination and accelerated recovery?
How does the impact of CDBG-Disaster Recovery funding vary across communities, and how do impacts
vary with local capacity?
What are the outcomes of CDBG-Disaster Recovery buyout programs and are these programs administered
equitably?
Where do people go after a disaster?
What is the optimal level of flood insurance coverage for the FHA single-family mortgage portfolio and how
can flood insurance policies maximize coverage?
Are current building efficiency, safety and resiliency codes for various types of housing adequate?
How are climate change risk and disasters affecting mortgage performance, and what are implications of
including climate risk in underwriting procedures?
Fair Housing
Foundational Learning Question: How can housing discrimination associated with online advertising, social
media, and finance be measured, investigated, and prevented?
Priority Research Questions:
To what extent do people of color with disabilities seek redress related to their disability?
How can research support HUD and community efforts to Affirmatively Further Fair Housing (AFFH)?
To what extent is there bias in home appraisals and automated valuations, and what are the fair housing
implications?
Why do comparatively few fair housing complaints relate to the home sales process, and are there ways to
identify discriminatory practices such as steering?
88
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Policy Topics, Foundational Learning Questions, and Priority Research Questions
What do early findings show about the experiences of voucher holders in jurisdictions with local source of
income discrimination ordinances?
Can innovative housing discrimination study methodologies better detect and measure evidence of
discrimination in advertised units than in-person paired testing methods?
Do home seekers with communication-related disabilities experience substantial barriers to information in
seeking rental units?
How are HUD's definitions of 'areas of minority concentration' and Site and Neighborhood Standards
shaping the development of new affordable housing?
What portion of HUD-assisted rental housing continues to be non-compliant with applicable federal
accessibility requirements, including in entrances and common areas of a building?
How effective are Fair Housing Initiatives Program agencies in providing fair housing education, outreach,
and investigations?
Homeownership
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy make first-time homeownership more accessible to all
Americans and more likely to result in housing stability and wealth-building for underserved populations?
Priority Research Questions:
How can equity in mortgage lending best be advanced, especially as algorithmic decision making is
becoming more prevalent?
What have HUD programs done to close the homeownership gap, and what role does homeowner equity
play?
What are FHA's policy options and tradeoffs for advancing shared equity as a federal homeownership
strategy?
Who has benefitted from pandemic forbearance programs?
What are the implications for the housing finance system of differences in the composition of mortgage-
backed securities of GNMA versus those of the housing GSEs and their changes over time?
To what extent is the GNMA portfolio vulnerable to climate risk?
How much does student loan debt influence mortgage default risk?
How effectively does a post-purchase, light-touch homeownership counseling program prepare FHA
borrowers for sustainable homeownership?
What risks and benefits are associated with providing down-payment assistance and other assistance to
first-time homebuyers?
Who is served by PHA-administered homeownership programs and to what extent have assisted
households been able to maintain homeownership and build assets?
Housing Finance and Affordable Housing Supply
Foundational Learning Question: How can federal policy mitigate market constraints in affordable housing
production and finance?
Priority Research Questions:
What are the gaps in financing for multifamily housing in America, and under what conditions would an
expanded FHA role be likely to support both increasing the supply of multifamily housing and preserving
and enhancing the supply of naturally occurring affordable housing?
How is the Housing Trust Fund being used to increase the production of affordable housing?
What happens to the LIHTC portfolio as communities start to reach the end of the extended use
affordability period?
How would changes to basis boost policies impact patterns of LIHTC development?
89
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Policy Topics, Foundational Learning Questions, and Priority Research Questions
What do housing subsidies buy?
How do zoning, subdivision regulations, procedural processes, and local land use conditions affect housing
supply, and what regulatory reforms are most effective at matching housing supply to demand in a way
that promotes inclusive communities?
To what extent do land use policies and other regulatory factors drive differences in rents and production
of affordable rental units?
How successful have laws aimed at increasing duplexes, Accessory Dwelling Units, and other low-density,
infill housing typologies been at creating new housing supply?
What is the potential for alternative models for housing affordability?
Can affordable housing and manufactured homes promote wealth building?
What is the impact of Davis-Bacon wage requirements on the cost of housing development, project quality,
and worker wages?
To what extent can modular or other off-site construction methods produce affordable accessible rental
units, and how does the affordability of off-site methods compare with that of site-built housing?
Housing and Health
Foundational Learning Question: How can HUD best address the health needs of people in its assisted housing
programs and also bring housing assistance to those for whom lack of housing is a major barrier to health?
Priority Research Questions:
What are the most significant problems with indoor air quality in HUD-assisted housing? What are cost-
effective ways to influence positive changes in indoor air quality?
Which program designs for deploying Integrated Pest Management in public and assisted housing are most
cost-effective and manageable?
How can HUD reduce the incidence of elevated blood lead levels among children of families in the Housing
Choice Voucher program?
How well do HUD's homeless assistance programs meet the health needs of young children and their
parents?
What home visiting model would most successfully promote health or other beneficial outcomes for
families with children in public housing and assisted housing or emergency shelters?
What are the most significant health disparities affecting HUD-assisted households? To what extent do
health challenges represent opportunities for cost-effective coordination of healthcare services with
housing assistance?
How prevalent is receipt of Medicaid Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) among HUD-assisted
households?
What accessibility features and design standards are recommended when building or rehabilitating housing
for the elderly to support residents' ability to age in place?
Indian and Tribal Issues
Foundational Learning Question: How can HUD better respond to housing and development challenges unique
to Native American communities and tribal lands?
Priority Research Questions:
What is the impact of the Indian Housing Block Grant competitive grant program for housing in tribal areas?
What are the distinct impacts and challenges of climate change in tribal communities and U.S. Territories,
and what are implications for housing and community development?
What are the most effective disaster preparedness recovery, mitigation, and adaptation strategies
undertaken by tribal communities, including pandemic response?
90
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Policy Topics, Foundational Learning Questions, and Priority Research Questions
How are crisis response approaches to prevent and end homelessness different in tribal areas?
What is the feasibility of developing local sources of building components and materials in tribal areas to
reduce housing construction costs?
Self-sufficiency and Economic Opportunity
Foundational Learning Question: How can housing assistance, including temporary assistance, best support
moves to opportunity neighborhoods, human capital development, and increased economic opportunity?
Priority Research Questions:
What additional approaches can encourage asset building among HUD-assisted households?
What is the unmet need for childcare among HUD-assisted households with children?
What effect does improved access to affordable childcare have on the employment outcomes of
parents/guardians and on the developmental outcomes of children?
What proportion of public housing residents employed under Section 3 requirements receive training or
certifications to improve their long-term employment prospects?
How many HUD-assisted tenants receive services from other federal programs focused on labor market
outcomes?
Are there service delivery models evaluated in the research literature that could improve self-sufficiency
outcomes for HUD-assisted households?
What are the costs and benefits of making broadband internet services a reimbursable expense for
providers of HUD-assisted housing?
What is the policy value of implementing rent payment reporting to credit bureaus, and what are the equity
tradeoffs for households in HUD-assisted housing?
Vulnerable and Special Populations
Foundational Learning Question: How can housing assistance respond more effectively to varied individual
needs of people who have barriers to housing stability, and what combination of supports and policies are most
effective at preventing evictions, homelessness, and housing insecurity for lower income persons?
Priority Research Questions:
How did PHAs and Continuum of Care groups (CoCs) partner to administer their allocation of Emergency
Housing Vouchers (EHV) and what were the outcomes of tenants who leased up with an EHV?
To what extent did the Emergency Rental Assistance Program prevent evictions and homelessness in the
short-term, did it have lasting effects on housing stability, and could it serve as a model for future HUD
programs?
How were eviction and foreclosure moratoria implemented during the pandemic, and what lessons does
that experience have for the future?
How are HUD grantees implementing the Eviction Protection Grant Program?
What have been the challenges and outcomes associated with implementing pandemic-related programs to
prevent and end homelessness?
What are the barriers people experiencing unsheltered homelessness face when trying to access the shelter
system, and what can shelter providers do to address these barriers?
What kinds of homelessness prevention and diversion strategies are communities employing, and which
strategies are most effective at resolving homelessness and preventing returns to homelessness?
For what portion of people experiencing homelessness is Rapid Rehousing the right resource, and what will
the optimal program structure and duration be in different housing markets?
What strategies best support formerly homeless tenants who wish to "Move-On" from Permanent
Supportive Housing?
91
HUD Learning Agenda: FY 2022-2026
Policy Topics, Foundational Learning Questions, and Priority Research Questions
What are the long-term outcomes of the Section 811 Housing for Persons with Disabilities program?
Are Mainstream, Non-Elderly Disabled (NED) vouchers an effective intervention for individuals with
disabilities experiencing homelessness?
What are the costs and preparation necessary for older adults to age in place successfully in public and
assisted housing?
How well are housing protections provided under the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) assisting
victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault and stalking achieve housing stability?
Enhanced Data and Methods
Foundational Learning Question: How should HUD improve data, methods, and processes to build capacity for
evidence-based policymaking?
Priority Research Questions:
How can HUD capture "positive" and "negative" outcomes and motivations for exit by assisted tenants?
What data linkages should HUD invest in as permanent, regular linkages and what data linkages can remain
as ad-hoc efforts?
Could HUD link IRS, HUD, and Census records to add to the evidence base on the effects of housing
assistance on tenants' employment, income, and earnings?
What can HUD learn about mortality outcomes through data linkages with the Census Bureau?
Are there components of HUD's administrative data collection that do not yield sufficiently complete
and/or high quality data for effective policymaking? How can these deficiencies be addressed?
Which data currently collected on paper forms would support useful policy analysis and performance
assessment if digitized in accessible and searchable form?
Are there data sources that HUD maintains internally that could be made public while protecting privacy?
How do REAC physical inspection results for the HUD stock compare with occupant-reported data from the
American Housing Survey and the American Healthy Homes Survey?
What would be the policy value of creating a national evictions database, including how the database could
inform policy to advance housing stability?
What can we learn from the American Housing Survey about how renter and homeowner decisions are
changing in response to climate change?
As HUD works to test and validate the American Housing Survey Housing Insecurity module, are there
examples or test cases worthy of research for how a housing insecurity index might be applied?
What do the next generation surveys on lead hazards and healthy homes tell us?
How could HUD cost-effectively capture data on energy expenditures and energy consumption for public
and assisted housing developments?
Which drivers of customer experience most frequently hinder satisfaction and trust for specific program
services?
92
Works Cited
Abt Associates Inc. 1996. "An Historical and Baseline Assessment of HOPE VI." Prepared for the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy Development and Research.
https://www.huduser.gov/Publications/pdf/hopevi vol1.pdf
Alvarez, Thyria and Barry Steffen. 2021. "Worst Case Housing Needs 2021 Report To Congress."
tps://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/Worst-Case-Housing-Needs-2021.html
Bo'sher, Luke, Sewin Chan, Ingrid Ellen, Brian Karfunkel, and His-Ling Liao. 2015. "Accessibility of
America's Housing Stock: Analysis of the 2011 American Housing Survey (AHS)."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/accessibility-america-housingStock.pdf
Bucholtz, Shawn, Emily Molfino, and Jed Kolko. 2020. "The Urbanization Perceptions Small Area Index:
An Application of Machine Learning and Small Area Estimation to Household Survey Data.' Working
Paper. https://www.huduser.gov/portal/AHS-neighborhood-description-study-2017.html#small-area-
tab.
Cisneros, Henry G., and Lora Engdahl, ed. 2009. From Despair to Hope: Hope VI and the New Promise of
Public Housing in America's Cities. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Cunningham, Mary K., Martha M. Galvez, Claudia Aranda, Robert Santos, Douglas A. Wissoker, Alyse D.
Oneto, Rob Pitingolo, and James Crawford. 2018. "A Pilot Study of Landlord Acceptance of Housing
Choice Vouchers." https://www.urban.org/research/publication/pilot-study-landlord-acceptance-
housing-choice-vouchers
Commission for Evidence-Based Policymaking. 2017. "The Promise of Evidence-Based Policymaking."
Washington, DC. https://cep.gov/cep-final-report.html.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2021. "Data Point: 2020 Mortgage Market Activity and Trends."
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb 2020-mortgage-market-activity-
trends report 2021-08.pdf
Dastrup, Samuel, Meryl Finkel, Kimberly Burnett, and Tanya de Sousa. 2018. "Small Area Fair Market
Rent Demonstration Evaluation: Final Report. https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/Small-
Area-FMR-Evaluation-Final-Report.html
Davis, M. and Company, Inc., Samantha Friedman, Angela Reynolds, Susan Scovill, Florence Brassier, Ron
R. Campbell, and McKenzie Ballou. 2013. "An Estimate of Housing Discrimination Against Same-Sex
Couples." https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/fairhsg/discrim samesex.html
Dunton, Lauren and Scott Brown. 2019. "Rapid Re-housing in 2018: Program Features and Assistance
Models." https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/RRH-community-scan-report.htm
Econometrica, Inc. and The Urban Institute, 2012. "Study of HUD's Section 108 Loan Guarantee
Program." https://www.huduser.gov/publications/pdf/HUD Section108 LoanGuaranteeProgram.pdf
Ellen, Ingrid and Torrats-Espinosa, Gerard. 2018. "Gentrification and Fair Housing: Does Gentrification
Further Integration?" Housing Policy Debate 29: 1-17.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2021. "Household Debt and Credit Report (Q3 2021).'
"
https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc
Fenelon, Andrew, Patrick Mayne, Alan E. Simon, Lauren M. Rossen, Veronica Helms, Patricia Lloyd, and
Jon Sperling. 2017. "Housing Assistance Programs and Adult Health in the United States.' American
Journal of Public Health. https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303649
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2016. "Department of Housing and Urban Development:
Actions Needed to Incorporate Key Practices into Management Functions and Program Oversight." GAO-
16-497. Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office.
Ittp://www.gao.gov/assets/680/678551.pdf.
Gress, Taryn, Seungjong Cho, and Mark Joseph. 2016. "HOPE VI Data Compilation and Analysis."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/HOPE-VI-Data-Compilation-and-Analysis.pdf
Gubits, Daniel, et al. 2016. "Family Options Study: 3-Year Impacts of Housing and Services Interventions
for Homeless Families." https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/Family-Options-Study-
Full-Report.pdf
Helms, Veronica E., Jon Sperling, and Barry L. Steffen. 2017. "Health Picture of HUD-Assisted Adults,
2006-2012." https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/Health-Picture-of-HUD.html
Henry, Meghan, Anna Mahathey, and Meghan Takashima. 2020. "The 2018 Annual Homeless
Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress. PART 2: Estimates of Homelessness in the United States."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/2018-AHAR-Part-2.pdf
Herbert, Christopher E., Daniel T. MCue, and Rocio Sanchez-Moyano. 2013. "Is Homeownership Still an
Effective Means of Building Wealth for Low-income and Minority Households? (Was it Ever?)" Harvard
University, Joint Center for Housing Studies. https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/hbtl-
06.pdf
Holin, Mary Joel, Larry Buron, Gretchen Locke, and Alvaro Cortes. 2003. "Interim Assessment of the
HOPE VI Program Cross-Site Report."
 ttps://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/pubasst/hopevi crosssite.html
Jefferson, Anna, Lauren Dunton, Hannah Thomas, Anna Mahathey, and Jill Khadduri. 2020.
"Understanding Rapid Re-housing through Participants' Experiences.'
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/RRH-Participants-2020.html
Khadduri, Jill, Kimberly Burnett, Carissa Climaco, Laurie Gould, and Louise Elving. 2012. "What Happens
to
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Properties at Year 15 and Beyond?"
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/hsgfin/lihtc report2012.htm
Khadduri, Jill, Meghan Henry, Lauren Dunton, and Eliza Kean. 2014. "Study of PHAs' Efforts to Serve
People Experiencing Homelessness."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/homeless/pha homelessness.htm
Lawrence, Kaitlyn G., Jacob K. Kresovich, Katie O'Brien, et al. 2021. "Association of Neighborhood
Deprivation With Epigenetic Aging Using 4 Clock Metrics." Journal of the American Medical Association.
3(11).
Levy, Diane K., Claudia L. Aranda, Margery Austin Turner, Rob Pitingolo, Rob Santos, Helen Ho, and Doug
Wissoker. 2015. "Housing Discrimination in the Rental Housing Market Against People Who Are Deaf
and People Who Use Wheelchairs: National Study Findings."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/fairhsg/hds disability.htm
Locke, Gretchen, Michelle Abbenante, Hong Ly, Naomi Michlin, Winnie Tsen, and Jennifer Turnham.
2006. "Voucher Homeownership Study, Vol 1: Cross-site Analysis."
https://www.huduser.gov/Publications/pdf/VHO_CrossSite.pdf
McCargo, Alanna, and Jung Hyun Choi. 2020. "Closing the Gaps: Building Black Wealth through
Homeownership." Urban Institute Research Report.
ttps://www.urban.org/research/publication/closing-gaps-building-black-wealth-through-
homeownership
Mezza, Alvaro, Daniel Ringo, and Kamila Sommer. 2019. "Can Student Loan Debt Explain Low
Homeownership Rates for Young Adults?" Consumer & Community Context 1.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/consumer-community-context-201901.pdf
National Research Council. 2008. "Rebuilding the Research Capacity at HUD." Washington, DC.
 https://www.nap.edu/catalog/12468/rebuilding-the-research-capacity-at-hud.
Northrop, Rebecca, et al. 2018. "HUD Section 8 Project Rental Assistance Program: Six Case Studies on
the Implementation Experience of the 2012 Grantees."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/Section-811-CaseStudies.pdf
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2021. Circular No A-11 Preparation, Submission, and
Execution of the Budget. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/a11.pdf
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2019. "Phase 1 Implementation of the Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance."
Memorandum M-19-23, July 10, 2019. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/M-
19-23.pdf.
Park, Kevin and Roberto Quercia. 2019. "Who Lends Beyond the Red Line? The Community
Reinvestment Act and the Legacy of Redlining." Housing Policy Debate 30: 1-23.
Pinkett, Randal, et al. 2018. "HUD Section 8 Project Rental Assistance Program: Process Evaluation."
"
 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/section-811-processeval-report.pdf
Public Law 115-435 (132 STAT. 5529). Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.
https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ435/PLAW-115publ435.pdf.
Turner, Michael and Patrick Walker, Policy and Economic Research Council. 2019. "Potential Impacts of
Credit Reporting Public Housing Rental Payment Data."
 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/Potential-Impacts-of-Credit-Reporting.pdf
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 2021. "HUD Program Evaluation Policy -
Policy Statement." https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/Federal-Register-2021-
17339.pdf
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Office of Inspector General (OIG). 2020.
"Wage Determinations for FHA-Insured Multifamily Construction Projects."
 https://www.hudoig.gov/sites/default/files/2020-10/2021-PH-0001.pdf
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Office of Policy Development and Research
(PD&R). 2020. "Report to Congress on the Feasibility of Creating a National Evictions Database."
 ttps://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/Eviction-Database-Feasibility-Report-to-Congress-
2021.html
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Office of Policy Development and Research
(PD&R). 2018. "Displacement of Lower-Income Families in Urban Areas."
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/displacementreport.pdf.
Vandawalker, Melissa, et al. 2020. "HUD Section 8 Project Rental Assistance Program: Phase
II
Evaluation Final Report Implementation and Short-Term Outcomes."
ttps://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/Section-811-Phase-ll.pdf
Verma, Nandita, et al. 2021. "Work, Engagement, and Well-being at the Midpoint: Findings from the
Family Self-Sufficiency Evaluation." https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/FSS-Midpoint-
2021.html
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Policy Development and Research
Washington, DC 20410-6000
OFF
un the *
April 2022
EQUAL HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY
