National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASA
NASA
e esa
NASA STRATEGIO PLAN
2022
www.nasa.gov
Cover image caption and credits
Front Cover:
The 2022 Strategic Plan cover images reflect the breadth and depth of NASA's efforts in aeronautics and
space research, exploration, and discovery. NASA will continue to lead the world in space, in collaboration
with the Nation's robust commercial space industry, academic institutions, and international partners. NASA
will remain the preeminent authority in space and aeronautics through groundbreaking science and re-
search, returning Americans to the Moon, preparing for Mars, enabling faster, greener aviation, and engag-
ing the public.
Image Credits:
1st Flight of Spacehab
Artemis /
Orion Spacecraft
NASA's Space Launch System Design
Expedition 65 - Anne McClain of NASA
The Galileo Project
Bubble Nebula
Churning Texture in Jupiter's Atmosphere
NASA's Webb Telescope
Kepler - Universe Missions - NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Ingenuity Mars Helicopter
Drones - Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)
Garig Gunak Barlu National Park, Australia
Molecular Adsorber Coating (MAC)
NASA's X-59 QueSST Airplane
Orion Spacecraft Orbit Illustration
Sun Coronal Mass Ejection
Fit Check of RRM3's Three External Tools
NASA's SpaceX Crew-1 Splashdown
Earth Science
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
i
Letter from the Administrator
March 28, 2022
It is my pleasure to share NASA's 2022 Strategic Plan. This plan
underscores the priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration
throughout our Agency's activities: strengthening the United
States' (U.S.) global leadership in space and aeronautics; tackling
the climate crisis; building a sustainable human presence
at the Moon and continuing human exploration on towards
Mars; spurring innovation that builds back better and creates
jobs; leading an alliance of international partners to enhance
cooperation in space and stimulate commercial activities in
low Earth orbit; and advancing diversity, equity, inclusion and
accessibility in a way that inspires present and future generations.
NASA's Strategic Plan aligns our priorities and activities around
four themes: Discover, Explore, Innovate, and Advance. The
Strategic Goals and Objectives that comprise these four themes
are designed to work hand in hand with NASA's Vision and
Mission.
NASA will build on our leadership in human spaceflight with
Artemis, a sustainable exploration program that will land the first woman and person of color on the
Moon, develop an outpost in cislunar space, and build the science and technological capabilities needed for
missions to Mars-and beyond. Through collaboration with international partners and U.S. industry, NASA
will also continue to advance cutting-edge science and technology on the International Space Station (ISS),
expanding commercial opportunities and enabling continuation of groundbreaking research conducted in
this orbiting laboratory through the rest of this decade until the development of commercial space stations
that can support this important work.
NASA will continue to deepen our understanding of Earth, the solar system, and the cosmos through our
science missions. We will also move forward with our next-generation Earth System Observatory. The
Agency continues to urgently prioritize our understanding of the effects of climate change and conduct
critical research to address its effects at home and abroad. We will do this by providing science data
that is transparent, inclusive, accessible, and reproducible using open data portals-empowering and
connecting the global scientific community through NASA's work in Earth observation and research. This
key information will also guide efforts related to disaster mitigation, fighting forest fires, and improving
agricultural processes. Further, NASA's work in advanced vehicle technologies, efficient airline operations
and sustainable aviation fuels will lead the nation to a sustainable, net-zero carbon emissions aviation
future. This Agency will continue to be a world leader in understanding, analyzing, and addressing climate
change.
As we push the frontiers of space and aeronautics in close collaboration with the private sector, we will spur
new capabilities. For example, faster, safer space transportation; greater access to surface destinations; and
new capabilities in space utilities and resource utilization will enable NASA's future space missions, while
also fostering growth and job creation in domestic industries. Aeronautics capabilities such as low-impact
supersonic flight, as well as safer, cleaner, and faster aviation technologies will revolutionize commercial air
transportation by reducing emissions from the aviation sector, improving efficiency and effectiveness for
the traveling public, and ensuring that the U.S. remains the global leader in aerospace for decades to come.
As the world's premier Agency in space exploration and research, NASA will prioritize cooperation with
the international community, industry, and academia. The continued growth of the Artemis Accords
enables us to strengthen our ties with spacefaring allies; establish a set of shared principles for a safe,
sustainable future in space; and improve our Nation's standing in the world. NASA will continue to advance
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
ii
the goal of space sustainability, encouraging norms of behavior and supporting broad adoption of debris
mitigation guidelines, to ensure our current activities in space do not limit the opportunities, resources and
activities for future generations operating in space. We will also build on the success of the Commercial
Orbital Transportation System, Commercial Cargo, and Commercial Crew programs, catalyzing additional
commercial activity in space to expand opportunities in low Earth orbit for both established players and
small businesses.
NASA contributes to our Nation's economic competitiveness, fueling growth in American industry and
supporting quality, high-paying jobs across the country. The economy of every U.S. state benefits from NASA
activities. We work with small businesses, industry, academia, and other government agencies to address
our research and engineering challenges, and to transfer out our technologies, capabilities, and data for
public benefit.
NASA values our highly skilled, highly dedicated, and diverse workforce, and rely on and are inspired by
their efforts toward achieving our Agency's Mission. Year after year, our employees have ranked NASA
as the best place to work in the Federal Government among large agencies. NASA has held this ranking
through the COVID-19 pandemic by building a culture that is resilient and flexible. We achieved new
heights with our missions, such as the James Webb Space Telescope, while more than 80 percent of our
workforce teleworked. As we look to the future and reflect on the challenges posed by the pandemic, NASA
will take the best components of this experience in charting a new future for the Agency that embraces
more flexibility and agility for employees to work without the geographic boundaries of past work models.
NASA will be a hybrid work environment that gives our amazing employees the flexibility to provide their
best contributions. This Agency continually reinforces a culture in which our employees feel they can be
authentic, welcomed, respected, included, and engaged; receive fair, just, and impartial treatment; and
can fully and independently access facilities, information, and communication technology, programs,
and services. We have emphasized our dedication to these cultural norms by adding "inclusion" to our
Core Values. NASA recognizes the need to better represent the diversity of the Nation. We strive to be
a champion by surpassing current benchmarks for diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility for all,
recognizing the continuously evolving demographics of this country. Our approach allows us to foster a
culture where the differences and unique backgrounds of our leadership and workforce bolster our ability
to develop innovative solutions, which ultimately allows us to better achieve our Mission. This document
expands upon our strategy to address these challenges.
NASA inspires young explorers, scientists, and technologists - the Artemis generation - who will lead our
Nation's skilled Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce. We will grow and
engage a dedicated and diverse workforce at all levels of the Agency, with a focus on equity and inclusion
throughout our talent strategy. In turn, this will allow for broader perspectives and new innovative ideas,
which NASA will utilize to deliver the best possible value across our missions and projects. As NASA has dis-
covered from our hybrid work environment over these recent years, our future will continue to evolve to
create more flexibility and agility in how we support the Mission, where we create breakthroughs, and how
we use flexibility to increase who can support NASA's missions. We will also focus on increasing the diversi-
ty of the innovation community with which NASA engages. Accordingly, we will explore new approaches
to
broadening participation in NASA opportunities, including participation by underserved communities and
individuals.
The 2022 Strategic Plan reflects NASA's constancy of purpose, while emphasizing the need for transparency,
public engagement, and cooperation with industry, academia, international, and other partners. This
document advances the policy and priorities set forth by the Biden-Harris Administration, along with
direction provided by legislation and appropriations. Following the course charted in the NASA 2022 Strategic
Plan, we will meet the complex challenges of the future and continue to accomplish the unprecedented,
inspiring the world in the process.
Bill ddson
Bill Nelson
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
iii
Table of Contents
Cover Image Captions and Credits
Letter from the Administrator
ii
NASA Overview
1
Strategic Plan Information
1
Centers and Facilities Nationwide
1
NASA's Organizational Structure
2
Achieving our Vision and Mission
3
Vision
3
Mission
3
Core Values
4
Overarching Approach
4
Our Strategic Plan
6
[Discover] Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge through
New Scientific Discoveries
8
Strategic Objective 1.1: Understand the Earth system and its climate
10
Strategic Objective 1.2: Understand the Sun, solar system, and universe
13
Strategic Objective 1.3: Ensure NASA's science data are accessible
to all and produce practical benefits to society
17
[Explore] Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon
and on towards Mars for Sustainable Long-term Exploration,
Development, and Utilization
20
Strategic Objective 2.1: Explore the surface of the moon and deep space
23
Strategic Objective 2.2: Develop a human spaceflight economy enabled
by a commercial market
26
Strategic Objective 2.3: Develop capabilities and perform research
to safeguard explorers
29
Strategic Objective 2.4: Enhance space access and services
32
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
iv
[Innovate] Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth
and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
35
Strategic Objective 3.1: Innovate and advance transformational
space technologies.
37
Strategic Objective 3.2: Drive efficient and sustainable aviation
40
[Advance] Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations
to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
43
Strategic Objective 4.1: Attract and develop a talented and diverse workforce
46
Strategic Objective 4.2: Transform mission support capabilities
for the next era of aerospace
49
Strategic Objective 4.3: Build the next generation of explorers
52
FIELD CENTERS AND FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER STRATEGIC GOAL CONTRIBUTIONS
56
Armstrong Flight Research Center (AFRC)
56
Ames Research Center (ARC).
57
Glenn Research Center (GRC)
59
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC)
60
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)
61
Johnson Space Center (JSC)
63
Kennedy Space Center (KSC)
64
Langley Research Center (LaRC)
65
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
66
Stennis Space Center (SSC)
67
Appendix A: Learning Agenda
69
A Culture of Evidence
70
Establishing a Learning Agenda
70
NASA's FY 2022-2026 Priority Questions
70
Priority Question #1
71
Priority Question #2
76
Priority Question #3
78
Priority Question #4
82
Priority Question #5
89
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
V
Appendix B: Capacity Assessment.
93
NASA's Capacity Assessment.
93
Appendix C: Developing and Implementing NASA's Strategy
108
Appendix D: Performance Goals, FY 2022-2023 Agency Priority Goals,
and Cross-Agency Priority Goals
110
Performance Goals
110
Agency Priority Goals (APGs)
110
Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goals
111
Appendix E: Relevant Legislation and Executive Orders
112
Appendix F: Acronym List
115
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
vi
NASA Overview
Strategic Plan Information
NASA produces a strategic plan every four years - in accordance with the Government Performance and
Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA) - to outline our vision for the future and to provide a
clear, unified, and long-term direction for NASA's activities. It is available on NASA's website.
Centers and Facilities Nationwide
The NASA workforce of 17,814¹ civil servants is distributed among its Centers, facilities, and Headquarters,
as shown in Figure 1. A contractor workforce supports each location by providing technical and business
operations services.
Figure 1: NASA's Centers and Facilities
Neil A. Armstrong
Test Facility
Glenn Research Center (GRC)
(managed by GRC)
Software Independent Verification
and Validation Facility (managed by GSFC)
Goddard Institute
for Space Studies
(managed by GSFC)
Goddard Space
Flight Center (GSFC)
Ames Research
Wallops Flight Facility
Center (ARC)
(managed by GSFC)
Mary W. Jackson Headquarters
Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (JPL)
Langley Research Center (LaRC)
Armstrong Flight
Research Center (AFRC)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
White Sands Test Facility
(managed by JSC)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC)
Johnson Space Center (JSC)
Michoud Assembly Facility
NASA center
(managed by MSFC)
NASA Shared Services Center
NASA supporting facility
(managed by SSC)
Stennis Space Center (SSC)
Federally funded research
and development center
NASA's Organizational Structure
The innovative, responsive, and dynamic nature of NASA's work benefits from our highly leveraged rela-
tionships with and between Mission Directorates, Mission Support Offices, and Centers. This organizational
model ensures that our leaders can take both a holistic and more narrowly focused approach to program-
matic, operational, business, and safety management. The Administrator and senior officials lead NASA by
providing top-level strategy, policy, and direction. NASA's Office of the Chief Financial Officer leads the Agen-
cy's budget development, execution, and organization-wide performance management activities.
1
NASA Workforce Profile, Workforce Information Cubes for NASA (WICN). Last updated February 12, 2022.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
1
Mission Directorates and Mission Support Offices at Headquarters manage decisions on programmatic
investments and guide operations of the Centers. Provided below are brief descriptions of NASA's Mission
Directorates and select offices (see Figure 2).
Figure 2. NASA's Organizational Structure
Administrator
Advisory Groups-
Chief Financial
NAC & ASAP
Officer
Deputy Administrator
Office of
Associate Administrator
Technology, Policy
and Strategy
Chief Information
Inspector General
Officer
Diversity & Equal
Small Business
Chief, Safety &
Chief Engineer
Mission Assurance
Opportunity
Programs
Chief Scientist/
Chief, Health &
Senior Climate
STEM Engagement
Communications
Medical Officer
Advisor
International
Legislative &
Exploration Systems
Ames Research
Aeronatics Research
Johnson Space
& Interagency
Intergovernmental
Development Mission
Center
Center
Mission Directorate
Relations
Affairs
Directorate*
Armstrong Flight
Kennedy Space
Research Center
Center
Science Mission
Space Operations
General Counsel
Directorate
Mission Directorate*
Glenn Research
Langley Research
Center
Center
Space Technology
Mission Support
Goddard Flight
Marshall Space
Mission Directorate
Directorate
Research Center
Flight Center
Jet Propulsion
Laboratory**
Stennis Space Center
*The Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate reorganized into two Mission Directorates at the beginning of FY 2022
**JPL is a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) managed by the NASA Office of JPL Management and Oversight
Dotted lines indicate independent advisory or oversight organizations
NASA Advisory Council (NAC)
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP)
The Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate (ARMD) conducts research to advance the safety, capacity,
and efficiency of the air transportation system, reduce emissions, and sustain U.S. technological leadership
in the aviation industry.
The Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD) invests in transformational technologies that help offset
future mission risk, reduce cost, advance capabilities that enable NASA's missions, and support space indus-
try growth and high-quality job creation. STMD identifies and promotes research and technology develop-
ment, demonstrates applicability, and supports the infusion of these technologies into NASA's exploration
and science missions as well as commercial space activities.
The Science Mission Directorate (SMD) conducts scientific exploration enabled by observatories that view
Earth from space, observe, and visit other bodies in the solar system, and gaze out into the galaxy and
beyond. NASA's science programs focus on three interdisciplinary objectives: discovering the secrets of the
universe, searching for life in the solar system and beyond, and safeguarding and improving life on Earth.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
2
The Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate (ESDMD)2 defines and manages the systems
development for programs critical to the Artemis lunar exploration initiatives. ESDMD is responsible for
developing the Space Launch System, the Orion spacecraft, and Exploration Ground Systems. ESDMD also is
responsible for developing technologies and capabilities to support sustainable human deep space explora-
tion.
The Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD) focuses on launch and space operations, including
launch services, space communications and navigation, and eventually, sustaining operations on and
around the Moon. SOMD also manages the International Space Station (ISS) and commercial space capa-
bility development and on-going operations, such as commercial crew and cargo flights and the program to
develop the commercial space stations that will replace the ISS.
The Mission Support Directorate (MSD) enables the Agency's missions by managing institutional services,
capabilities, and critical mission support resources. MSD is actively reducing institutional risk to NASA's
current and future missions by improving processes, stimulating efficiency, and providing consistency and
uniformity across institutional standards and practices.
NASA's best asset for achieving mission success is a diverse, multidisciplinary, and skilled workforce across
all centers and facilities. NASA's approach to performance management is based on the premise that each
team member brings unique experience and important expertise to projects. NASA is committed to nurtur-
ing an organizational culture in which individuals make full use of their time, talent, and opportunities to
pursue the highest standards in engineering, research, operations, and management.
Achieving our Vision and
Mission
NASA inspires the world through exploration and discovery, leading scientific and technological advance-
ments that benefit Americans and all humanity. Our efforts in space help to further the national economy,
including through innovative commercial partnerships with American businesses. With the increasing threat
of climate change, NASA's efforts to study and understand the Earth are of critical global significance. In
addition, NASA's partnerships with academic institutions support a robust Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce and promote diversity, equity, and inclusion in the fields of science and
technology.
We embrace the challenge of furthering global scientific and technological achievement and expanding
the realm of what is possible in aeronautics and space. This challenge is our passion, our purpose, and is
reflected in our Vision and Mission.
Vision
Exploring the secrets of the universe for the benefit of all.
Mission
NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit
of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery.
2 At the beginning of FY 2022, the Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate was divided into the Exploration Systems
Development Mission Directorate and the Space Operations Mission Directorate.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
3
Core Values
NASA's long-term success will be largely determined by the strategic decisions and investments we make to-
day, as well as constant adherence to our five guiding Core Values, shown below.
NASA's Core Values
NASA's existing Core Values of Safety, Integrity, Inclusion, Teamwork, and Excellence
mandate individual and organizational behavior across the Agency at all levels:
Safety
Integrity
NASA's constant attention to safety
NASA is committed to maintaining
is the cornerstone upon which we
an environment of trust, built upon
build mission success.
honesty, ethical behavior, respect,
and candor.
Inclusion
Teamwork
NASA is committed to a culture
NASA's most powerful asset for
of diversity, inclusion, and equity,
achieving missión success is a multi-
where all employees feel welcome,
disciplinary team of diverse, talented
respected, and engaged.
people across all NASA Centers.
Excellence
To achieve the highest standards in engineering, research,
operations, and management in support of mission success, NASA
is committed to nurturing an organizational culture in which
individuals make full use of their time, talent, and opportunities
to pursue excellence in conducting all Agency efforts.
Overarching Approach
NASA will lead a new era of space exploration that will advance our understanding of climate change, inspire
the Nation and the world, promote equitable opportunities in NASA's engagements, and support the cre-
ation of jobs in the growing space economy, increasing the flexibility of the hybrid workplace for NASA em-
ployees to provide their best support to the Mission. These changes will give NASA employees more options
for how they work and support the NASA Mission. Our Strategic Goals and Objectives are underpinned by
Government-wide efforts including:
Maintaining America's global standing;
Driving economic growth;
Addressing climate change; and
Promoting racial and economic equity.
These national efforts are reflected in numerous Executive Orders (see Appendix E), U.S. National Space
Policy, Congressional mandates, and independent advisors such as the National Academies of Sciences, En-
gineering, and Medicine (also known as the National Academies). Please refer to Appendix C for more infor-
mation on NASA's strategy development and implementation.
The Strategic Plan also reflects additional space-specific policy guidance as communicated by the U.S. Space
Council. The Vice President announced the United States Space Priorities Framework on December 1, 2021.
Through this framework, NASA will support a robust U.S. space enterprise while preserving and maintaining
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
4
space for future generations, focusing on three key priorities:
Strengthening STEM education through inspirational missions and collaboration with the academic
community;
Addressing the climate crisis through space-based observation equipment, international
partnerships, and data-sharing; and
Promoting rules and norms that govern space, create stability, and preserve and protect the space
environment for the future.
NASA's 2022 Strategic Plan defines a framework that consists of Strategic Goals aligned to our Mission; Stra-
tegic Objectives describing our strategies for achieving the Strategic Goals; and multiyear, outcome-oriented
Performance Goals. Annual targets and milestones allow NASA to measure and track incremental progress
towards achieving the Performance Goals.
Figure 3. NASA's Performance-Evidence Framework
Strategic Goals
Timeless
Strategic Objectives
Priority Questions
10+ years
4 years
Agency Priority Goals
Performance Goals
2 years
2-5 years
Annual target
Cross Agency Priority
Goals
Multi year
Milestone / Activity
Strategic Plan
Capacity Assessment
4 years
4 years
Agency Performance Plan
Learning Agenda
2 years
4 years
Annual Performance
Annual Evaluation Plan
Report
1 year
1 year
Agency Financial Report
1 year
Agency, GAO/OIG,
Congressional priorities
Legend
GPRAMA
Evidence Act
PMA
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
5
Congress signed the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act) into law in
January of 2019. The Evidence Act establishes a framework for agencies to organize evidence building, data
management, and data access functions to ensure an integrated connection to data and evidence. The 2022
Strategic Plan includes NASA's first-ever Learning Agenda and Capacity Assessment, which support this new
requirement.
The Learning Agenda (Appendix A), Capacity Assessment (Appendix B), and Annual Evaluation Plan demon-
strate NASA's commitment to evidence-based decision-making and provide a roadmap for the Agency's
learning efforts and capacity-building. These documents align with the Strategic Plan and intend to produce
outcomes that tie together the Strategic Objectives and their results. We are committed to maturing the in-
tegration of evidence into the performance framework in the early implementation of the Evidence Act and
will continue to evolve the Agency's evidence-building capabilities in future products and processes.
The Learning Agenda is a roadmap for NASA to systematically plan evidence-building activities that
will allow the Agency to make evidence-based policy decisions. The Learning Agenda identifies a set
of broad questions NASA sees as urgent to moving our operations and Mission forward over the
next four years. When answered, these questions will help us work more effectively and efficiently,
using evidence to make decisions relating to missions, programs, and investments.
The Capacity Assessment provides an overview of evidence-building activities across the Agency
that are appropriate to achieve NASA's Mission. The Capacity Assessment reviews NASA's ability
to conduct evidence-building activities and identifies where resources are needed to develop and
improve our capacity. This process supports the Agency's needs for learning and management,
performance and strategic management, interagency and private sector coordination, and
oversight and accountability.
The Annual Evaluation Plan identifies evaluations the Agency plans to undertake over the next fiscal
year. This plan cultivates data sharing and resources between NASA organizations and provides
information to help support our evidence-driven culture. Progress will be reported to NASA's Office
of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) and OMB, including relevant contributions to the NASA Volume
of Integrated Performance and other performance documents.
These plans capture the priorities and capacity of NASA to build evidence that will inform our decision-mak-
ing, promote transparency, and hold us accountable for developing systematic evidence-building capacity.
As part of evidence-building, the Learning Agenda, Capacity Assessment, and Annual Evaluation Plan allow
us to further expand our capabilities and integrate our performance, evidence, and data management capa-
bilities that will shepherd evidence-based decision-making.
Our Strategic Plan
We strive to accomplish our Vision and Mission with the utmost care - recognizing that we are stewards of
taxpayer dollars, critical human capital, and one-of-a-kind facilities.
NASA has identified four Strategic Goals that will strengthen our ability to accomplish our Mission and
contribute to maintaining American leadership in space, aeronautics, climate research, and innovation while
driving economic growth in the civil space sector. The Strategic Goals, as well as their corresponding Strate-
gic Objectives, are outlined below and discussed in detail in the following section of this plan.
Four major themes, each characterized by a single word, reflect the focus of NASA's four Strategic Goals:
DISCOVER references NASA's enduring purpose of scientific discovery
EXPLORE references NASA's push to expand the boundaries of human presence in space
INNOVATE references NASA's broad mandate to promote the technologies of tomorrow
ADVANCE references the capabilities, workforce, and facilities that allow NASA to achieve our
Mission
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
6
Strategic Goals and Strategic Objectives
Theme
Goal Statement
Objective Statement
1.1: Understand the Earth system and its climate
Expand human knowledge
1.2: Understand the Sun, solar system, and universe
through new scientific
S
discoveries
1.3: Ensure NASA's science data are accessible to all and produce practical
benefits to society
2.1: Explore the surface of the Moon and deep space
Extend human presence to
the Moon and on towards
2.2: Develop a human spaceflight economy enabled by a commercial market
Mars for sustainable
long-term exploration,
2.3: Develop capabilities and perform research to safeguard explorers
development, and utilization
2.4: Enhance space access and services
3.1: Innovate and advance transformational space technologies
Catalyze economic growth
and drive innovation to
address national challenges
3.2: Drive efficient and sustainable aviation
4.1: Attract and develop a talented and diverse workforce
Enhance capabilities and
operations to catalyze
current and future mission
4.2: Transform mission support capabilities for the next era of aerospace
success
4.3: Build the next generation of explorers
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
7
NASA's Aqua satellite captured this true-color image in September 2020, showing the fires in the West, the smoke from those fires drifting over the country,
several hurricanes converging from different angles, and Hurricane Sally making landfall. Image Credit: NASA Worldview, Earth Observing System Data
and Information System.
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
EXPAND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
THROUGH NEW SCIENTIFIC
DISCOVERIES.
Goal Statement
NASA's enduring purpose is scientific discovery and exploration for the benefit of the United States and all
of humanity. NASA seeks to discover the secrets of the universe, search for life elsewhere, and protect and
improve life on Earth and in space. Finding answers to these profound science questions requires support
for national priorities in science and exploration, enhancing new opportunities for cross-disciplinary science,
and expanding the societal benefits of our science programs. It also requires continued progress on the
scientific priorities, including those identified by the National Academies of Scien ces, Engineering, and Med-
icine through their decadal surveys.
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
We will extend our 60-year history of scientific
NASA's Global Learning and Observations to bene-
achievements, make groundbreaking discoveries,
fit the Environment (GLOBE) program and Aerosol
and transform knowledge of humanity, our home
Robotic Network programs have a presence in over
planet, the solar system, and the universe. NASA's
100 countries.
missions have not only changed what we know,
but also how we think as a society-truly civiliza-
These existing NASA partnerships offer an excel-
tion-scale science. NASA's missions and sponsored
lent foundation for strengthening and expanding
research provide access to the farthest reaches of
alliances across the world, continuing to model the
space and time and deliver essential information
importance of open and transparent science that
about our home planet, directly improving life here
benefits all. Further, NASA's continuing leadership
on Earth.
in open data and open science serves to champi-
on free and open access to scientific data so that
We are undertaking new work that builds on our
the body of knowledge grows for the benefit of all
past successes in individual disciplines to enable a
humankind. NASA also supports and leads interna-
more collaborative environment at the forefront of
tional diplomatic efforts in developing global norms
science and science applications. We are applying
of behavior to ensure a safe, secure, and sustain-
those lessons learned and best practices in support
able space environment.
of other national needs, including climate change,
space weather prediction, and planetary defense.
Driving Economic Growth
We embrace and thrive on this iterative process
NASA-funded research, contracts, and Small Busi-
that is supportive of evolving national and user
ness Innovative Research initiatives provide eco-
needs.
nomic benefits across the United States. Likewise,
addressing climate change and enabling climate
NASA has an open data policy that makes its sci-
forecasting will contribute to economic growth
ence data available to all. Current data systems
across the United States.
are focused on disseminating data to the science
community to support research in five science
Addressing Climate Change
disciplines: Earth Science, Astrophysics, Planetary
NASA's Earth science activities are focused on in-
Science, Heliophysics, and Biological and Physical
creasing our understanding of the Earth and its
Sciences. We plan to undertake investments and
changing climate. NASA's ability to view Earth from
initiatives that will make our data more accessible
the unique vantage point of space provides a broad
and accelerate its use by the science community. In
and integrated set of uniformly high-quality data
Earth Science, we are exploring new ways to work
covering all parts of the planet. These data help
with the social science community to integrate
inform decision makers across all levels of Govern-
NASA data and information with socioeconomic
ment-as well as industry, disaster prevention and
and other kinds of data to provide insights on en-
response, and agriculture-to make policy and op-
vironmental challenges that disproportionately im-
erational decisions to address climate change.
pact communities of color.
Finally, NASA acts as a global champion of free and
open access to scientific data. We collaborate with
our partners in a spirit of global engagement and
science diplomacy. As more nations seek to use
space for scientific investigation, the body of knowl-
edge grows for the benefit of all.
Maintaining America's Global Standing
The activities undertaken within Strategic Goal 1 di-
rectly leverage existing and emerging international
and domestic partnerships to maintain and expand
U.S. leadership in Earth and space science, advanc-
ing America's global standing in science and inno-
vation. With over 400 active international partner-
ships, NASA Science missions are a valuable tool for
projecting soft power and for global engagement.
In addition to those mission-related agreements,
1
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35178
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
9
Strategic Goal 1
DISCOVER
Strategic Objective 1.1
Understand the Earth system and its climate.
Integrate and advance knowledge of Earth as a system to meet the challenges of
environmental change, strengthen our Nation, and improve life for all people.
Lead Office
knowledge about the Earth system is more press-
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
ing than ever. NASA is a world leader in the pro-
duction of data necessary to understand, model,
Objective Overview
monitor, and ultimately predict climate and envi-
Earth's changing environment impacts every as-
ronmental change. NASA is the only organization
pect of life on our planet and has profound im-
in the world with an integrated end-to-end pro-
plications on society and our Nation's well-being.
gram in Earth-observing mission development,
Studying Earth as an integrated, complex system
launch, operations, technology, research, data
is essential to understanding the causes and con-
systems, and applications.
sequences of climate change and other global
environmental concerns. Based on the increasing
NASA's measurements and predictive models
body of Earth observation data and correspond-
provide information for decision makers and or-
ing research, we know now that our planet and
ganizations that work with communities affected
its climate are profoundly changing. While much
by the impacts of changing climate, including
remains to be understood about the natural and
information regarding the efficacy of policies and
human-induced processes and the complex cou-
decisions that help the United States and others
pling at the heart of these changes, one thing is
adapt and thrive on our changing planet. NASA
clear: NASA's measurements are critical to their
also works with international partner satellites;
understanding.
data from airborne, ship-based, and ground net-
work instrumentation; and outputs from opera-
Climate adaptation and mitigation efforts cannot
tional weather models from National Oceanic and
succeed without these robust climate observa-
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and other
tions and research. As the impacts of global cli-
meteorological agencies. NASA integrates and
mate change become more numerous and acute,
harnesses these disparate data sources, enabling
the demand for accurate, timely, and actionable
scientists to investigate and solve large questions
Below: Inside the Integrated Processing Facility at Vandenberg Space Force Base in California, United Launch Alliance (ULA) technicians prepare to remove
the
contamination
barrier and access door from the two ULAAtlas V rocket payload fairings for the joint NASA-U.S. Geological Survey Landsat 9 satellite on
June 24, 2021. Image credit: NASA/Randy Beaudoin
NINI
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
that cannot be addressed using data from only a
single mission or spaceborne instrument.
NASA Earth Science projects explore our rapidly
changing world, where natural and human factors
interact, following an interdisciplinary, Earth sys-
tems approach that examines the interplay among
the atmospheric, ocean, land, and ice systems.
Using the recommendations of the National Acad-
emies' 2017-2027 decadal survey for Earth science
and applications from Space¹ as a compass, and
informed by Government-wide priorities, NASA
Earth Science is developing the observing systems
that will answer the most important science and
application questions of the next decade across the
following focus areas:
Atmospheric Composition
Weather and Atmospheric Dynamics
Recently received Landsat 9 photos provide a preview of how the mis-
Climate Variability and Change
sion will help people manage vital natural resources and understand the
Water and Energy Cycle
impacts of climate change on the Earth's landscapes and coastlines, add-
ing to Landsat's unparalleled data record that spans nearly 50 years of
Carbon Cycle and Ecosystems
space-based Earth observation.
Earth Surface and interior
Implementation is achieved through a balanced
portfolio of programs as articulated in the SMD's
Our pursuit of answers to fundamental science
Science Strategy², and engages various commercial,
questions about the Earth system benefits human-
interagency, and international partnerships.
ity in many ways. NASA's unique ability to view
Earth from the perspective of space allows for the
Objective Strategy
collection of broad, high-quality data from all parts
NASA's Earth science activities utilize observations
of the planet. Only from space can we make the ob-
from the vantage points of space, air, and in-situ to
servations of the complex Earth system that can il-
advance our scientific understanding of the Earth in
luminate connections between short and long time
service to the United States and the world. We lead
scales, fine and global spatial scales, and chemical,
the world in the production of data necessary to
physical, and biological processes. NASA shares this
understand, model, monitor, and ultimately predict
unique knowledge and data freely and openly with
climate change, and we are expanding our efforts
the global community, including members of the
in the years ahead. In May 2021, NASA announced
Government, commercial, and academic commu-
the implementation of the Earth System Observa-
nities. For example, in the agriculture sector alone,
tory in response to the 2017-2027 Decadal Survey,
NASA's Earth science observations have proven
consisting of a new set of Earth-focused missions to
helpful with crop area estimates, productivity as-
provide key information to understand the Earth's
sessments, and yield models across a range of time
systems and processes, as well as interactions
scales, water planning, and irrigation management.
between the processes on the land, ocean, and
Likewise, NASA observations and models serve
in the atmosphere. We use our understanding of
many other economic sectors and industries, disas-
natural processes and their interactions to provide
ter management, and community planning.
objective information on changes happening now,
as well as estimates of how our environment might
To complete innovative Earth science missions,
evolve in the future.
NASA will effectively manage a diverse portfolio
while balancing innovation with successful program
execution. Specifically, NASA will:
1
Thriving on Our Changing Planet: A Decadal Survey for Earth
Measure mission success against
Observation from Space, National Academies of Science, Engi-
clearly written top-level measurement
neering, and Medicine, Space Studies Board (2018)
requirements;
2 Science 2020-2024: A Vision for Scientific Excellence, NASA
Develop objective criteria to enable
Science Mission Directorate (2020)
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
11
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
unequivocal measurement of success or
Most recently, NASA and ESA have formed a first-
failure in meeting each requirement;
of-its-kind strategic partnership to observe Earth
Establish a budget for each new mission that
and its changing environment. Recognizing that cli-
funds the mission's complete lifecycle cost,
mate change is an urgent global challenge, the tim-
based on detailed engineering studies and
ing is right for NASA and ESA, as partners in space,
independent cost estimates;
to join forces to lead and support a global response
Obtain tactical-level community advice on
to climate change. The partnership is an effort to
portfolio adjustments via the NASA Advisory
help address and mitigate climate change through
Council, Science Committee, and the science
monitoring Earth with combined efforts of both
advisory committees; and
agencies in Earth science observations, research,
Implement effective partnerships-
and applications. This partnership was formalized
commercial, international, interagency,
through a joint statement of intent, signed in July
academic, and others-that leverage NASA
2021, which outlines how the agencies will collabo-
resources and extend scientific results.
rate to ensure continuity of Earth observations; ad-
vance understanding of the Earth system, climate
As an example, NASA's Commercial Smallsat Data
change and application of that knowledge; and
Acquisition (CSDA) program evaluates and procures
collaborate on an open data policy that promotes
data from commercial vendors that complement
open sharing of data, information, and knowledge
NASA's measurements and help advance NASA's
within the scientific community and the wider pub-
Earth science research and applications activities.
lic.
NASA's commitment to equity is based on the
Contributing Programs and/or Program
understanding that the use of NASA data, prod-
ucts, and personnel can and should inform the
Activities for Strategic Objectives
just treatment and meaningful involvement of all
Earth Science Research; Earth Science Technology;
people-regardless of race, color, national origin,
Earth System Explorers; Earth System Science Path-
income, or ability-with respect to development,
finder; Earth Systematic Missions.
implementation, and evaluation of programs, prac-
tices, and activities that affect human health and
the environment.
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
NASA improves national capabilities to predict cli-
mate, weather, and natural hazards, to manage re-
sources, and to develop environmental policy by le-
veraging our partnerships with other agencies that
maintain forecast and decision support systems,
such as NOAA, USGS and EPA. Most notably, NASA
develops, builds, tests, and launches weather sat-
ellites that are operated by NOAA, as well as Earth
observation satellites operated by USGS.
NASA also works with our international partners to
jointly develop or coordinate our Earth observation
activities. NASA and the European Space Agency
(ESA) have a long and successful history working
together to understand our changing planet. For
example, in 2020, NASA, NOAA, and our European
partners, launched the Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich
satellite, which is collecting the most accurate data
yet on global sea level rise. The mission also mea-
sures atmospheric temperature and humidity that
will help improve climate models and weather fore-
casts.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
12
Strategic Goal 1
DISCOVER
Strategic Objective 1.2
Understand the Sun, solar system, and universe.
Conduct scientific studies of the Sun and solar system, use space as a laboratory, peer out into
the vast reaches of the universe, and play a catalyzing role in lunar robotic exploration. These
efforts are guided by National priorities and recommendations from the National Academies'
decadal surveys and implemented through a balanced portfolio of programs.
Lead Office
decade. Basic research uses the data from our
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
missions to create new knowledge and advance
our understanding of the universe. The research
Objective Overview
program includes competed programs in data
The success criteria for SMD are progress in
analysis, theory, technology development, and
answering fundamental science questions, im-
suborbital projects. Small missions are undertak-
plementing the decadal survey priorities, and re-
en as competitively selected, Principal Investiga-
sponding to direction from the Executive Branch
tor-led Explorers missions. Large and medium
and Congress. Four of NASA's science areas con-
strategic missions are directed to NASA Centers
tribute directly to this Strategic Objective.
for implementation and are managed within the
Strategic Missions Program.
Astrophysics is humanity's scientific quest to
discover the origin of the universe and of life it-
Heliophysics embraces arguably the original "first
self. How does the universe work? How did we
light" of scientific wonder (the Sun), and how it
get here? Are we alone? Progress is advanced
influences the very nature of space. Our nearest
through the combination of basic research and
star sends out a steady outpouring of particles
flight missions. Astrophysics is guided by the Path-
and energy (the solar wind), which forms an ex-
ways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics
tensive and dynamic solar atmosphere impacting
for the 2020s (Astro2020) Decadal Survey, which
all the planets. This solar atmosphere extends
identifies science goals and recommendations for
to the edge of the heliosphere, shaping the pro-
astrophysics planning and investment for the next
tective bubble in which our solar system travels
Below: Using its Wide Angle Topographic Sensor for Operations and eNgineering (WATSON) camera, NASA's Perseverance Mars rover took this selfie over
a rock nicknamed "Rochette," on September 10, 2021, the 198th Martian day, or sol, of the mission. Two holes can be seen where the rover used its robotic
arm to drill rock core samples for potential return to Earth as part of a future mission. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
around the Milky Way. Guided by the 2013 Solar
and Space Physics: A Science for a Technological So-
ciety decadal survey, the goal of heliophysics is to
understand the Sun and its interactions with Earth,
the solar system and the interstellar medium, in-
cluding space weather. Heliophysics incorporates
studies of the interconnected elements into a sin-
gle system that produces dynamic space weather.
Studying this system allows us to discover the
fundamental physics governing how the universe
works and helps protect our technology and people
from the impacts of space weather. The study of
the coupled solar-terrestrial system can also teach
us more about the habitability of planets in other
stellar systems throughout the universe.
Space weather directly affects the safety of humans
Tomato plants growing under LED lights in a growth chamber inside a
in space and on Earth by influencing the opera-
laboratory at the Kennedy Space Center. These plants are growing in units
tion of electrical power grids, communications
equipped with features designed to mitigate the effects of microgravity on
and navigation systems, gas and oil pipelines, and
water distribution, oxygen exchange, and root growth when aboard the
spacecraft electronics and orbital dynamics. NASA
International Space Station. Image credit: NASA
develops instrumentation, technology, models, and
research tools to understand space weather. NASA
also collaborates with agencies such as the Nation-
al Science Foundation and NOAA to improve space
and radar techniques to better understand objects'
weather predictive capabilities.
orbits, shapes, sizes, and other relevant character-
Through the observation and discovery of complex
istics. These planetary defense activities enable the
planetary worlds and objects, we seek to under-
science community to understand the nature of
stand our solar system and the distribution of life
near-Earth objects, information that could be lever-
within it. The focus of Planetary Science is to ad-
aged to mitigate a possible Earth impact.
vance scientific knowledge of the origin and history
Biological and physical sciences pioneers scientific
of the solar system, the potential for life elsewhere,
discovery and enables space exploration by using
and the hazards and resources present as humans
the spaceflight environment, in and beyond low
explore space. The scientific foundation of this en-
Earth orbit, to conduct experiments that cannot be
deavor is the 2011 Vision and Voyage for planetary
done on Earth. This work focuses on transformative
science in the Decade 2013-2022 decadal survey.
science to contribute to advances in science, tech-
NASA manages a diverse portfolio of research and
nology, and space exploration. This research also
technology development and unique mission in-
enables human spaceflight exploration to expand
vestigations. NASA is operating spacecraft at Mars,
the frontiers of knowledge, capability, and oppor-
Jupiter, and the Moon, and preparing to launch two
tunity in space. Implementation requires both sci-
missions to asteroids. NASA is also undertaking
entific research and technology development. Stra-
flagship missions to Jupiter's moon Europa and to
tegic priorities in this area are informed by the Na-
return samples from Mars, and selected two mis-
tional Academies of Sciences' decadal survey and
sions to explore Venus. Knowledge gained by fu-
research is currently guided by the first decadal
ture human missions to the Moon will be utilized to
survey (2011). Recommendations for the second,
visit Mars and possibly other solar system bodies,
the decadal survey on biological and physical sci-
in concert with continued robotic missions.
ences research in space 2023-2032, are expected
Advances in planetary science, coupled with leading
to be delivered during the summer of 2023. NASA
efforts to detect, track, and characterize near-Earth
partners with the research community and a wide
objects, will continue to improve planetary defense.
range of organizations (e.g., academic, commer-
cial, and Government laboratories) to do this work.
NASA's Near-Earth Objects Observations Program
funds research activities to increase our under-
Partnerships with other NASA organizations, other
standing of the motions, compositions, and nature
Government agencies, industry and international
of near-Earth objects. This includes using optical
partners also provide access to a broad range of
experimental platforms (e.g., ISS, un-crewed space-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
14
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
craft, ground-based analogs for spaceflight, drop
annually to rate scientific progress. In addition, the
towers, aircraft) and a diverse set of experts. NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
strives for broad involvement of the research and
Authorization Act of 2005 directed that the perfor-
technology development communities in the for-
mance of each science division shall be reviewed
mulation and dissemination of its work.
and assessed by the National Academy of Sciences
at five-year intervals.
Objective Strategy
NASA's success in science discovery across these
Searching for Life Elsewhere
core contexts is based on a balanced program
The search for life in the solar system and beyond
that involves a number of critical and enabling
is guided by the ability to understand how life
elements: laying the scientific and technical foun-
originated on Earth and by the quest to find hab-
dation for space-based missions through Research
itable environments outside of Earth. To improve
and Development; inventing and using new space-
the knowledge of environmental requirements for
based observing and sampling capabilities; creating
habitability, NASA will develop tools for detecting
the context and capabilities to interpret the result-
life, develop tools for determining the relative hab-
ing data; and maximizing the return on investment
itability of present or ancient environments, and
in the acquisition of data. SMD's suborbital and
explore analog environments on Earth. This will
ground-based programs are conducted to enable
facilitate target selection for further robotic, and
or complement space-based observations and train
ultimately human, exploration. Observations from
future mission scientists and engineers.
SMD's astrophysics missions have made it clear
that habitable planets exist around stars other than
To complete innovative space missions NASA will
the Sun and that such planets are plentiful. Improv-
effectively manage a diverse portfolio while balanc-
ing techniques and ideas for discovering and char-
ing innovation with successful program execution.
acterizing habitable and/or inhabited environments
Like our approach in Strategic Objective 1.1, NASA
on these planets, coupled with an understanding of
will:
the potential false positives for habitability or life,
will enable prioritization of exoplanets for targeted
Measure mission success against clearly
follow-up observations. In the coming decades, this
written top-level measurement requirements
will help to push frontiers of discovery and enable
Develop objective criteria to enable
the search for signs of life on worlds that may be
unequivocal measurement of success or
capable of harboring life, both within our own solar
failure in meeting each requirement
system and within the galaxy.
Establish a budget for each new mission that
funds the mission's complete life-cycle cost,
NASA's strategy relies on applying the lessons
based on detailed engineering studies and
learned about the origin, evolution, and distribu-
independent cost estimates
tion of life on Earth to other bodies in our solar sys-
Obtain tactical-level community advice on
tem and beyond. There is no single measurement
portfolio adjustments via the NASA Advisory
or experiment that will definitively reveal the pres-
Council, Science Committee, and the science
ence of extant or past life on a body in our solar
advisory committees
system or a planet around another star. NASA will
Implement effective partnerships-
utilize many measurement results in a "Ladder of
commercial, international, interagency,
Life Detection" that will inform any certainty of the
academic, and others-that leverage NASA
discovery of past or present life elsewhere.
resources and extend scientific results
How NASA Engages and Works with
NASA will implement missions only after focused
Partners
development has matured required technologies.
NASA will extend partnerships domestically and
A balanced science program proactively identifies
internationally. Science is a broad national and in-
potential technologies required to meet future mis-
ternational enterprise and SMD partners with U.S.
sion requirements, conduct trade studies, assess
Federal agencies and more than 60 nations and
development risks, and invest in new technologies
international research organizations to leverage
well in advance of mission implementation. NASA is
ideas, capabilities, and resources. NASA's con-
also expanding the use of lower-cost CubeSats and
stellation of Sun, Earth, solar system, and distant
SmallSats to accomplish our science goals.
universe spacecraft and observatories are models
NASA engages the science advisory committees
of international and interagency cooperation and
serve to further common scientific interests; about
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
15
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
two-thirds of all of NASA's science missions have at
least one international partner, and many missions
have multiple interagency or international partners.
NASA's science is uniquely positioned among Fed-
eral agencies to transfer content and expertise to
an informative environment to support learning
across all age groups. Data are accessible through
multiple channels, which allows NASA to benefit
from partners actively engaged in learning commu-
nities and emerging citizen-based science.
Contributing Programs and/or Program
Activities for Strategic Objectives
Astrophysics Explorer; Astrophysics Research; Cos-
mic Origins; Exoplanet Exploration; Physics of the
Cosmos; Biological and Physical Sciences ; Helio-
physics Explorer Program; Heliophysics Research;
Heliophysics Technology; Living with a Star; Solar
Terrestrial Probes; Discovery; Lunar Discovery and
Exploration; Mars Exploration; Mars Sample Return;
New Frontiers; Outer Planets and Ocean Worlds;
Planetary Defense; Planetary Science Research; Ra-
dioisotope Power; Space Weather.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
16
Strategic Goal 1
DISCOVER
Strategic Objective 1.3
Ensure NASA's science data are accessible to all and produce
practical benefits to society.
In order to ensure NASA's science data are accessible to all and produce practical benefits
to society, SMD plans to undertake investments and initiatives that will accelerate the
accessibility and use of SMD data by its user community by investing in the following: 1)
capabilities to enable open-source science; 2) continuous evolution of data and computing
systems; and 3) community and strategic partnerships for innovation.
Lead Office
the next 5 years, SMD divisions will substantially
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
increase the size of data archives as the volume of
data generated by new missions increases from
Objective Overview
approximately 10 petabytes per year today to
SMD's missions and research activities inspire
over 100 petabytes per year in 2026. This growth
curiosity and increase the understanding of our
of NASA's science archives presents unique op-
planet, the solar system, and the universe. One
portunities for new scientific discovery and part-
of our core capabilities is the ability to collect,
nerships, as well as significant challenges for data
store, manage, analyze, and distribute data and
management, curation, access, analysis, comput-
information for scientists, international partners,
ing, and computational modeling.
learners of all ages, decision-makers, and industry
to further science, improve modeling, increase
As part of this effort, we plan to undertake invest-
ments and initiatives that will accelerate the ac-
knowledge, and spur economic innovation.
cessibility and use of SMD data by its existing and
The science divisions within SMD generate, ana-
new user communities. NASA's data initiatives are
lyze, activate, and archive large amounts of data
focused on making actionable data accessible to
to support science objectives and deliver data and
other Federal agencies, relevant decision-makers,
scientific results to users around the world. Over
stakeholders, and the public.
Below: University of Florida team members conduct thermal-vacuum testing of the European Space Agency (ESA)-NASA Laser Interferometer Space
Antenna observatory's Charge Management Device. From left to right: Ph.D. students Samantha Parry Kenyon and Benjamin Letson, and Postdoc, Dr.
Taiwo Olatunde. Image Credit: NASA
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
This will be done by investments in three key areas:
OPEN (TRANSPARENT) SCIENCE
1) capabilities to enable open-source science; 2)
scientific process and results should
continuous evolution of data and computing sys-
be visible, accessible, and
tems; and 3) community and strategic partnerships
understandable
for innovation.
Objective Strategy
NASA is working on several initiatives to invest in
OPEN (INCLUSIVE) SCIENCE
the three key areas identified above. Open-source
process and participants should
science is the collaborative culture enabled by tech-
welcome participation by
nology that empowers the open sharing of data,
and collaboration with diverse
information, and knowledge within the scientific
community and with the wider public to accelerate
people and organizations
scientific research and understanding. Open-source
science builds on concepts from open-source soft-
ware that expanded participation in the developing
OPEN (ACCESSIBLE) SCIENCE
code and applies these to the scientific process to
data, tools, software,
accelerate discovery by openly conducting science
documentation, and publications
from project initiation through implementation.
should be accessible to all (FAIR)
Data and computing programs play a critical role in
enabling open-source science through thoughtful-
ly-designed software systems that are initiated as
open-source software projects, are easy to use, and
OPEN (REPRODUCIBLE) SCIENCE
support the wide variety and high volume of data
scientific process and results
generated by NASA's scientific missions. Specifi-
should be open such that they are
cally, this initiative will allow open development of
software and models, and better enable research-
reproducible by members of the
community
ers to perform computational experiments that are
constrained or verified by observations.
Open-source science requires a culture shift to a more inclusive, transpar-
ent, and collaborative scientific process, which will increase the pace and
Community and strategic partnerships will acceler-
quality of scientific progress. To help build a culture of open science, NASA
ate the modernization of various modeling efforts.
is championing the Open-Source Science Initiative, focused on data trans-
The adoption of machine learning and artificial
parency, accessibility, inclusivity, and reproducibility.
intelligence technologies will greatly speed up the
data analysis and computational performance of
the models. Our commercial partners will access
our science data and integrate it into models and
sistent with the 2017 America INNOVATES Act,¹ con-
service offerings, while our interagency partners
tinues beyond the current 23 projects to countless
benefit from improved data system services
more with the open-source science approach.
through easier access to data and the software
used to generate the products.
NASA recognizes that Earth's changing climate
disproportionately influences environmental expo-
NASA is also leveraging strategic and commercial
sures and vulnerabilities of the world's poorest and
partnerships to drive technological innovation.
marginalized communities, and that NASA data,
For example, NASA has piloted programs that use
products, and personnel can and should inform
unsupervised learning and anomaly detection to
the just treatment and meaningful involvement of
explore the extreme conditions associated with su-
all people. Through collaboration with the Office of
perstorms. The more we understand what causes
Diversity and Equal Opportunity, SMD will identify
such space weather, the more we can improve our
current barriers to and opportunities for advancing
ability to forecast and mitigate the effects. Finally,
equity for underserved communities and expand
expansion of citizen science initiatives through the
partnerships with organizations currently working
use of volunteers in the pursuit of knowledge, con-
1
America Implementing New National Opportunities
To Vigorously Accelerate Technology, Energy, and Science Act
(America INNOVATES Act), S.1187, 2017.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
18
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
directly with such communities. Likewise, NASA
with our grantees to make data more accessible
to organizations and explore across science dis-
ciplines (e.g., with social scientists) to ensure the
more effective use of NASA data for furthering envi-
ronmental justice.
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
NASA works with a broad range of users and
stakeholders in furthering our understanding of
climate and its impacts through the collected data,
analysis, and modeling; these communities include
all levels of government (Federal, state, and local),
international governments, domestic and interna-
tional consortia, think tanks and philanthropies,
academia, and industry. Using Earth observation
data, we work with a number of state and local
agencies in responses to disasters from wildfires
to hurricanes. NASA has also partnered with local
government entities to help plan for climate change
and sea level rise in urban environments.
NASA also partners with members of the interagen-
cy community, through agreements with specific
agencies, as well as interagency working groups,
to further the use of relevant data. International-
ly, NASA partners with space agencies across the
world to develop, build, launch, and maintain plat-
forms and instruments for long-term climate data,
including satellite altimetry. Likewise, NASA part-
ners with organizations around the world to pro-
vide data to support sustainable, climate-resilient
decision-making.
Contributing Programs and/or Program
Activities for Strategic Objectives
Earth Science Data Systems; Applied Sciences.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
19
A strong commitment to maintain U.S. leadership in space is required to establish a lasting human presence at the Moon. NASA will continue
to
lead
a
bold coalition into deep space, uniting international exploration goals with private-sector ambitions for a peaceful human endeavor beyond Earth. (Artist
Illustration) Image Credit: NASA
STRATEGIC GOALI 2
EXTEND HUMAN PRESENCE TO THE
MOON AND ON TOWARDS MARS FOR
SUSTAINABLE LONG-TERM EXPLORATION,
DEVELOPMENT, AND UTILIZATION.
Goal Statement
NASA's rich history of human spaceflight provides the foundation for today's exploration vision: to maintain
U.S. leadership in space, establish a lasting presence on and around the Moon, and pave the way forward
to Mars and beyond. This strategy begins with the Artemis, a series of missions that will land the first wom-
an and the first person of color on the lunar surface, marking the first time in nearly 50 years that humans
have landed on the Moon. Along the way, we will develop and inspire a diverse national science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce, and inspire new generations to join our ranks.
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
The Moon is the ideal location to revive human ac-
and Mars. All of these elements are necessary to
tivities in deep space and develop the orbital and
establish the surface infrastructure that will enable
surface infrastructure needed to support repeated
humans to live at and explore new, scientifically
missions in a campaign that will evolve in complexi-
rich locations.
ty and duration as we prepare for Mars. Building on
more than two decades of operations in low Earth
Throughout this century, NASA has focused on in-
orbit aboard the International Space Station, and
creasing private-sector involvement in space, laying
leveraging our wealth of experience with ground-
a foundation for long-term exploration where Gov-
breaking exploration, we will explore farther to
ernment agencies are one of several customers in a
ensure U.S. leadership in global space exploration,
vibrant space economy. NASA has successfully im-
build back better through innovation and collabo-
plemented programs where the Government funds
ration with industry, strengthen our global partner-
and supports key technologies such as advanced
ships, and empower NASA to develop technologies
space communication technologies to enable high-
to solve challenges here on Earth.
er data volume and reliability for communications
between spacecraft and Earth as well as between
Establishing a long-term human presence at the
astronauts on the lunar surface. NASA's invest-
Moon and conducting the first human mission to
ments in the global space economy and in the
the surface of Mars will be among the most chal-
next-generation STEM workforce will ensure that
lenging technical enterprises in human history. This
people around the world can participate in a great
era of human exploration will require innovative
vision of long-term human life in cislunar space. By
technologies and systems-some of which have not
making this vision a reality, we will improve life on
yet been demonstrated-to explore new and more
Earth and extend U.S. leadership farther than ever
challenging locations, like the lunar South Pole. De-
before.
veloping these capabilities will spur advancements
in critical fields like medicine, energy, materials sci-
Maintaining America's Global Standing
ence, manufacturing, and climate science.
NASA is focused on addressing the challenges of
taking humanity toward the Moon and deeper into
Artemis mission success will require the continua-
space, enabling future discoveries, and providing
tion of existing partnerships and the development
knowledge to improve life on Earth. We remain the
of new ones. Working with commercial partners
partner of choice for human exploration missions,
enables NASA to focus its attention forward, while
and through Artemis and exploration of Mars,
creating jobs and stimulating the economy An
NASA and America will maintain leadership among
emerging space economy will create new jobs and
spacefaring nations, building on decades of suc-
industries and empower countless future genera-
cessful multinational partnerships.
tions while benefitting life on Earth.
Building on successful multinational partnerships
Our Nation is not alone in making plans to explore
in low Earth orbit, NASA will extend its leadership
the Moon. Pursuing human exploration missions to
role into deep space, continuing many of its part-
the Moon and Mars ensures continued American
nerships at the Moon, while growing new partner-
preeminence in science, technology, and explora-
ships with emerging spacefaring nations. Through
tion, and encourages others to join us. Our exist-
the Artemis Accords, NASA has established a prac-
ing international partners have expressed great
tical set of principles to guide cooperation among
interest in collaboration on Artemis. NASA is pur-
nations participating in the Agency's 21st century
suing opportunities for collaboration with several
lunar exploration plans. The Accords implement
emerging space nations interested in joining us on
the principles of the 1967 Outer Space Treaty and
the Moon via the Artemis Accords. NASA also con-
reinforce commitment by the United States and
tributes to other nations' science missions, leverag-
partner nations to the Registration Convention,
ing their skills and interests to conduct scientific re-
the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, and
search, develop and demonstrate technology, and
other norms of behavior, including the public re-
train international crews to operate farther from
lease of scientific data, that NASA and our partners
Earth for longer periods of time than ever before.
have supported. As of March 2022, the following
Over the next several decades, NASA will estab-
countries have announced their signing of the
lish long-term footholds in cislunar space and on
Accords: Australia, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, Israel,
the lunar surface and deploy complex crew-rated
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealand,
Poland, Romania, South Korea, Ukraine, the United
transportation and habitation systems to the Moon
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
21
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
States. Discussions with many other nations that
ing economic growth focuses on fostering compe-
wish to join the Artemis program and sign the Arte-
tition and innovation for society's benefit. We will
mis Accords are ongoing.
continue to partner with the U.S. private sector
to push the economic frontier deeper into space
Developing a lasting and effective exploration cam-
and build on what we've already established in low
paign requires the energy, expertise, and innova-
Earth orbit.
tion of the world's top minds. Under NASA's leader-
ship, Artemis is designed to leverage and maximize
the ambitions and expertise of our international
partners. These efforts will ensure U.S. internation-
al leadership while inspiring and benefitting the
global public and strengthening our global part-
nerships while also easing the cost burden to the
American taxpayer.
Driving Economic Growth
NASA supports the development of a robust low
Earth orbit economy in which many stakeholders
on Earth can participate. The new space economy
benefits U.S. industry, promotes technological dis-
covery, improves life on Earth, and allows NASA to
focus on the challenges of exploring the Moon and
Mars. NASA's activities follow the direction of Con-
gress and the White House, recognizing that it is in
the national security and economic interests of the
United States to encourage the development of a
healthy and robust commercial sector in low Earth
orbit, in which the Government is one of many cus-
tomers.
In the last decade, NASA has proven that a ser-
vice-based model for access to space can success-
fully spur new, non-Government, space-based
revenue streams for American companies. Follow-
ing success with the Commercial Crew Program in
low Earth orbit, NASA is acquiring human landing
systems, logistics deliveries to the Moon, and ad-
vanced spacesuits for ISS and Artemis as services.
Public-private partnerships, like those formed
under NASA's Next Space Technologies for Explo-
ration Partnerships model (NextSTEP), provide the
impetus for industry to invest in the space econ-
omy. Competition spurs innovation, reduces cost,
and ensures NASA's economic impact is spread
across a range of business types and sizes.
NASA understands the importance of promoting
economic growth through tangible and measur-
able goals and activities. NASA initiatives and
programs-along with the development of technol-
ogies required to make NASA missions possible-
represent a significant investment in our Nation's
industrial base and manufacturing capabilities,
research and education endeavors, and advanced
technology sectors. NASA's keen interest in promot-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
22
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
Strategic Objective 2.1
Explore the surface of the moon and deep space.
Extend human presence into cis-lunar space to allow for sustained operations on the lunar
surface and then on towards Mars to unlock mysteries of the universe.
Lead Office
operates the systems and facilities needed to
Exploration Systems Development Mission Direc-
process and launch rockets and spacecraft during
torate (ESDMD)
assembly transport and launch.
Objective Overview
The Human Landing System (HLS) will be the first
Artemis missions, and future human exploration
commercially developed vehicle to transport hu-
mans to and from the surface of the Moon. NASA
of Mars, will expand opportunities for Americans,
increase our global standing, and inspire the next
is encouraging innovation through competition
generation of leaders in STEM. Long-term explo-
to find the best possible systems for taking astro-
ration and scientific utilization present unique op-
nauts to the Moon on increasingly frequent and
portunities for major discoveries impacting critical
longer duration missions.
fields like medicine, energy, and manufacturing
NASA will develop an Artemis Base Camp near the
that will benefit society worldwide.
Moon's South Pole. The base camp is envisioned
The Orion spacecraft will carry humans beyond
to include an unpressurized rover, a pressurized
low Earth orbit, provide emergency capability,
rover, a fixed surface habitat and a surface power
sustain the crew in transit, and provide safe re-en-
system to keep the elements powered during the
try from deep space. The Space Launch System
lunar night and dormant periods.
will send crew via Orion, as well as supplies to the
NASA will work closely with international partners
Gateway space station around the Moon NASA's
to achieve Artemis objectives and grow the global
Exploration Ground Systems team develops and
space economy. These relationships will reinforce
Below: In this view looking up inside High Bay 3 of the Vehicle Assembly Building at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida, the work platforms have
been retracted from around the Artemis I Space Launch System on September 20, 2021. All 10 levels of platforms were extended and retracted as part of
an umbilical test. Artemis I will be the first integrated test of the Space Launch System (SLS) and Orion spacecraft. In later missions, NASA will land the first
woman and the first person of color on the surface of the Moon, paving the way for a long-term lunar presence and serving as a steppingstone on the way
to Mars. Image credit: NASA/Frank Michaux
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
the
America's position as the global leader in space
exploration and provide new avenues for partner-
ship with nations around the world. NASA's deep
space exploration efforts will continue to act as a
beacon of peace and scientific partnership around
the globe.
Artemis missions will be driven by scientific objec-
tives like collecting new information on planetary
processes and the character and origin of volatiles.
NASA will uncover the history of our Earth-Moon
system and new information about our Sun. The
human data collected as mission durations in-
crease will make future work in deep space safer
and more efficient. What we learn will also help us
protect our home planet and improve daily life for
people around the world.
Objective Strategy
Artist's illustration of the Gateway at the Moon. Built and outfitted by NASA,
Exploring beyond low Earth orbit requires a space
commercial, and international partners, the Gateway will be humanity's first
transportation system that can safely transport
deep space exploration and research outpost. Image Credit: NASA/Alberto
Bertolin
crew and cargo to deep space. Artemis includes a
crew vehicle, heavy-lift launch vehicle, the Gateway
in lunar orbit with logistics resupply, Human Land-
ing Systems, and lunar surface systems to support
astronaut expeditions, as well as supporting Earth-
based ground facilities and systems.
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
As NASA establishes infrastructure at the Moon,
Establishing a sustained human presence on the
a long-term orbiting platform will be necessary to
Moon and conducting the first human mission to
support increasingly lengthy surface expeditions.
the surface of Mars will be among the most chal-
The Gateway will also host some science experi-
lenging endeavors in human history. NASA will
ments and provide additional data on the impacts
engage with other Government agencies for collab-
of deep space flights on humans and systems.
orative efforts (e.g., Department of Energy, Depart-
ment of Commerce, National Science Foundation,
NASA and its partners are preparing for a robust
United States Geological Survey), and to ensure
human return to the Moon, with an incremental
compliance with national and international policies
buildup of capabilities in orbit and on the surface
and obligations (e.g., Federal Aviation Administra-
that will help prepare for the first human missions
to Mars. Viewed as a deep space planetary labora-
tion, Department of State).
tory, the Moon offers many opportunities to unlock
International partners are critical to Artemis and
new discoveries about the Earth-Moon system or-
the Moon towards Mars plan. The Artemis Accords
igins and the deep history of our solar system. Ar-
established in 2020 set common principles for the
temis systems have dual purposes, to explore the
peaceful exploration and use of outer space. The
Moon and to demonstrate key capabilities for Mars.
Accords are grounded in the Outer Space Treaty of
The rovers and power systems on the surface, HLS
1967. To date, more than a dozen countries have
hazard avoidance and navigation systems, and
signed the Artemis Accords, including both estab-
even ascent capabilities could have direct applica-
lished and new partners, and NASA anticipates
tions to human missions to Mars. The orbit-to-sur-
many more to join in the months and years ahead.
face operations involving astronauts ferrying be-
tween gravity fields will explore new challenges and
The NASA-led Gateway, that will be located in lunar
techniques to mitigate them. Increasing surface
orbit, is a multinational collaboration with many
duration stays and extravehicular activities on a
of our established partners in low Earth orbit. We
planetary surface will provide crucial data in mak-
have already signed agreements with three part-
ing surface exploration safer and more effective.
ners to provide modules and critical capabilities:
the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), European Space
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
24
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
Agency (ESA), and Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency (JAXA). ESA and JAXA will also contribute
early Gateway science instrument suites that will
study the deep space radiation environment.
Following success with NASA's Commercial Crew
Program in low Earth orbit, NASA is acquiring HLS,
logistics deliveries to the Moon, and advanced
spacesuits for ISS and Artemis as services. A ser-
vices approach allows companies to engage other
customers in addition to NASA and introduce new
revenue streams into their business models. Com-
petition leads to innovation, and these partnerships
will ease the financial burden on NASA so our high-
ly skilled workforce can focus on advanced technol-
ogy development and research while solving the
future challenges of exploration.
Contributing Programs and/or Program
Fission Surface Power - To keep Artemis surface elements continuously
Activities
powered, regardless of environmental conditions, NASA is developing
Exploration Capabilities; Exploration Operations;
a small, lightweight fission surface power system to demonstrate on the
Space Launch System (SLS); Orion; Orion Produc-
Moon. Expanding on the agency's former Kilopower project, NASA's
tion & Sustainment; Exploration Ground Systems
Space Technology Mission Directorate has partnered with the Department
(EGS); Advanced Cislunar and Surface Capabilities
of Energy and industry to make this concept a reality. In the coming years,
NASA will design, fabricate, and test a system that provides up to 40 kilo-
(ACSC); Gateway; Human Landing System (HLS);
watts of electrical power - enough to run 30 average households - contin-
xEVA and Human Surface Mobility Program; Moon
uously for at least 10 years.
& Mars Architecture.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
25
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
Strategic Objective 2.2
Develop a human spaceflight economy enabled by a
commercial market.
Expand the space economy by leveraging the ISS and stimulating the growth of human
spaceflight commercial activities.
Lead Office
goals in science, technology, and human space
Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD)
flight. As such, we are investing resources to fos-
ter a robust human spaceflight economy.
Objective Overview
A robust human spaceflight economy ensures
Since its inception, industry, academia, and our
national interests for research and development
international partners have used the International
in space are fulfilled while allowing NASA to focus
Space Station (ISS) as a testbed for research and
Government resources on the challenges of deep
the development and maturation of state-of-the-
space exploration through Artemis.
art systems that increase access to space. NASA
is supporting new space stations from which
NASA will maintain access to a human-rated plat-
we and other customers can purchase services
form in low Earth orbit (LEO) to continue U.S. hu-
and stimulate the growth of commercial human
man presence and expand the American foothold
spaceflight activities. As commercial LEO destina-
in space. The continuous operation of a research
tions become available, we intend to implement
and technology demonstration platform in space
an orderly transition from current ISS operations
is critical to achieving NASA's and the Nation's
to these new commercial destinations.
Below: Two U.S. cargo ships are pictured attached to the International Space Station, as the orbital complex flew 260 miles above the Laccadive Sea south
of India
in 2019. In the right foreground, the Northrop Grumman Cygnus space freighter, with one of its prominent cymbal-shaped UltraFlex solar arrays is
attached to the Unity module. At top rear, the SpaceX Dragon commercial resupply ship is attached to the Harmony module. Image Credit: NASA
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
The ISS is the prime example of American leader-
ship in global space exploration, enabling a U.S.-led
multinational partnership to advance shared goals
in space. The ISS supports a robust commercial
Crew-3 Dragon
marketplace, with more than 20 commercial facil-
ities operating and generating revenue, including
in-space manufacturing facilities and a commercial
airlock. As NASA increases the opportunities for
business on the ISS, the number and types of com-
panies taking advantage of those opportunities
will likely increase, which will in turn create more
Progress 79
demand.
Cygnus 16
Objective Strategy
Soyuz MS-19
Progress 78
NASA is committed to the development of both the
supply side of the future human spaceflight econ-
omy (i.e., future platforms providing services for
On November 11, 2021, five spaceships were parked at the space station
a fee) and the demand side (i.e., need for on-orbit
including Northrop Grumman's Cygnus space freighter; the SpaceX Crew
services for Government requirements or to pro-
Dragon vehicle; and Russia's Soyuz MS-19 crew ship and Progress 78 and
duce products of commercial value).
79 resupply ships. (Artist Illustration) Image Credit: NASA
NASA pursues several avenues to enable the sup-
ply side of the human spaceflight economy. The
ISS has entered an era of robust commercial use,
taking advantage of our capacity to develop the
technologies that industry needs to move from
Forecast," which describes NASA's long-term needs
being dependent on NASA for access to space
for microgravity services. NASA also provides sup-
to providing the access we need to continue our
port for sustained demand focus areas, such as
mission in LEO after the lifetime of the ISS. These
industrial biomedicine and manufacturing. NASA
avenues include offering the use of an ISS port to
also offers marketing and advertising opportunities
a private company to deploy a new commercial
aboard ISS on a fully reimbursable basis.
element on the ISS; supporting the development
and use of free-flying commercial LEO destinations;
Through the successful implementation of similar
and offering the use of the ISS for private astronaut
commercialization strategies, such as the Com-
missions. NASA's expectation is that one or more of
mercial Resupply Services and Commercial Crew
these development and demonstration efforts will
Program, NASA demonstrates that companies can
prove commercially viable, allowing U.S. and inter-
develop and operate the next generation of space-
national customers to purchase human spaceflight
craft and launch systems to serve the ISS. This
services in LEO while also providing us with the
success brought the commercial launch industry
platforms and capabilities we require in LEO.
back to the United States, demonstrating that U.S.
industry is more than capable of competing on the
Creating a robust human spaceflight economy de-
global stage. This commercial capability also fuels
pends on bringing many new businesses and peo-
the growing U.S. share of the global launch market
ple into space and requires the development of not
and provides expanded utility, additional research
only the supply of services, but also the demand for
time, and broader opportunities for discovery and
those capabilities. NASA will soon see the first pri-
space exploration. An important goal of this com-
vate astronaut mission to the ISS. Private astronaut
mercialization strategy is to encourage the devel-
missions are dedicated missions that are privately
opment of new industry capabilities, enabling these
funded, fully commercial spaceflights on commer-
companies to sell future services to all customers,
cial launch vehicles for a variety of potential com-
not just NASA.
mercial purposes utilizing ISS.
Today, commercial crew and cargo transportation
Simultaneously, NASA's Commercial LEO Develop-
services provide a vital lifeline from Earth to the
ment and ISS programs are developing and ma-
ISS for technology demonstrations. There are 21
turing the demand side of the human spaceflight
commercial facilities operating onboard ISS today,
economy. NASA issued a preliminary "LEO Demand
including a 3-D printer, a bioprinter, and an airlock,
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
27
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
which are available for use by both NASA and other
NASA relies on partnerships with academia and
paying customers.
industry where we are developing American-led
space infrastructure enabled by a commercial mar-
NASA is committed to using the ISS and its capabili-
ket, enhancing space access for both Government
ties to aid in the development of the U.S. industry's
and commercial entities. These activities are cat-
ability to provide the necessary platforms and ser-
alysts for economic development, including those
vices in LEO. NASA is also committed to continued
related to space tourism. Together, NASA and our
Government utilization of LEO beyond the ISS for
partners will help ensure the well-being of future
basic research and development, Earth and deep
space explorers and support existing and future
space observations, and astronaut training. Our
space operations for both NASA and non-NASA
commitment includes providing Government fund-
missions.
ing to private industry via contracts and partner-
ships to ensure that future capabilities fulfill Gov-
Contributing Programs and/or Program
ernment requirements.
Activities
These partnerships will enable private industry to
Commercial LEO Development Program; Interna-
assume roles that have been traditionally Govern-
tional Space Station; Commercial Crew Program;
ment-only by creating new opportunities for eco-
Crew and Cargo Program.
nomic growth through new markets and industries
in LEO. They will potentially yield long-term cost
savings to the Government by leveraging industry
innovation and commercial market incentives.
These activities will create a market environment
in which commercial LEO destination services are
available to both Government and private-sector
customers. Commercial LEO destinations, along
with commercial launch services, will provide the
backbone of that the human spaceflight economy
after the life of ISS.
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
When NASA returns to the Moon, we will go in a
way that reflects the world today, with Govern-
ment, industry, and international partners working
together in a global effort to build and test the sus-
tainable systems needed for successfully executing
challenging missions on towards Mars. The advent
of a robust commercial space economy has intro-
duced new partners to the world of human space
exploration and shifted the way we do business. To
remain the world leader in human space explora-
tion, we will continue to evolve.
The emphasis on public-private partnerships as the
preferred program acquisition approach to extend
human presence deeper into space will continue to
change, with a new focus on embedded teams with
mutually agreed upon support and outcomes. We
continue to engage industry and academia early
to build trusted relationships during the program
definition and solution creation process, providing
NASA competencies through people, processes,
tools, and facilities to help in the management of
risks encountered during the execution of our part-
ner's proposed approach.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
28
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
the
Strategic Objective 2.3
Develop capabilities and perform research to safeguard
explorers.
Provide enhanced capabilities, maintain crew health and performance, and conduct research
to ensure safe space exploration.
Lead Office
Each of these challenges must be solved to en-
sure crew members are safe and healthy as we
Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD)
move beyond low Earth orbit.
Objective Overview
NASA is pursuing new technologies that will help
Humans worked briefly on the Moon 50 years
manage the effects of extended stays in space on
ago and have pioneered technological advances
human health and performance. Each advance in
in low Earth orbit for the past 40 years. The activ-
our knowledge can provide basic human needs,
ities that NASA leads that will return humans to
including oxygen and water, along with the abil-
the Moon, and from there on towards Mars, are
ity to maintain and repair critical systems. NASA
focused on "buying down" risk through research
will demonstrate the performance of emergent
and the development of tools and techniques to
in an environment where the risk to
protect humans during deep space exploration.
NASA is working to overcome radiation, crew iso-
technologies the safety of human or vehicle operations without can val-
idate the performance of the technology
lation, and deep space communications delays, as
risking the crew or mission, and prior to their use
well as food, medicines, and shelf-life constraints.
in an operational environment.
Below: NASA astronaut Kate Rubins works inside the Life Sciences Glovebox in late 2020, conducting research for the Cardinal Heart study. Biomedical
research seeks to help scientists understand the aging and weakening of heart muscles to provide new treatments for humans on Earth and astronauts in
space. Image Credit: NASA
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
the
NASA emphasizes partnering with industry and aca-
demia to develop new technologies that will enable
future space travel that is less reliant on resupply
and communications from Earth. The resultant re-
duction in logistics costs and increase in system ca-
pabilities and reliability are designed to safeguard
humans on missions beyond low Earth orbit. The
knowledge gained though research on the effects
of reduced gravity on the systems in the body-in-
cluding studying research areas that are unique to
the Moon, Mars, and other destinations-will help
quantify the best methods and technologies to sup-
port safe and productive human missions in deep
space.
Objective Strategy
NASA is developing capabilities, necessary counter-
measures, and technologies in support of human
space exploration, focusing on those capabilities
that will mitigate the highest risks to crew health
and performance. Some of these technologies will
reduce medical and environmental risks and en-
sure effective human-system integration with the
exploration mission systems necessary to safely
explore in deep space.
New approaches are necessary to rapidly develop
prototype systems, demonstrate key capabilities,
and validate operational concepts to safeguard
explorers during future human missions beyond
low Earth orbit. NASA will continue to invest in ex-
NASA astronaut and Expedition 66 flight engineer Megan McArthur is seen
ploration research and development and testing in
with a taco made using fajita beef, rehydrated tomatoes and artichokes,
both terrestrial and space environments. Most sig-
and chile peppers. The chile peppers were grown as part of the Plant
nificantly, we will continue to use the ISS as a step-
Habitat-04 investigation aboard the International Space Station. Image
pingstone to expand human presence farther into
Credits: NASA/Megan McArthur
the solar system. The International Space Station
(ISS) continues to expand our knowledge and expe-
rience in long-duration spacecraft operations and
serves as an irreplaceable testbed for technology
demonstrations of new capabilities and upgraded
NASA supports the astronaut corps, space flight
vehicle systems.
readiness training, and the health of crew mem-
bers before, during, and after each spaceflight
NASA enables space exploration by reducing the
mission to the ISS. From Apollo through the Space
risks to astronaut health and performance using
Shuttle and to the ISS, crew members undergo
ground research facilities, the ISS, and analog en-
rigorous preparation, which is critical to mission
vironments. The performance of research in this
success. To pave the way to the Moon and onto
combination of settings facilitates the development
Mars, NASA will partner with academia and com-
of procedures and furthers research areas that are
mercial industry to prepare crewmembers for living
unique to the Moon, Mars, and other destinations.
and working for extended periods in space. Key
Our portfolio is built around an architecture that
activities include the identification of new training
uses evidence to identify a risk to the human sys-
regimes to prepare crews for extended periods of
tem, gaps in our knowledge about characterizing or
space travel, including the identification of proto-
mitigating the risk, and the activities necessary to
cols for medical or technical problems that might
produce the knowledge necessary to close the gaps
arise when returning to Earth will take days, not
and reduce the risk.
hours.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
30
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
For decades, NASA has demonstrated world-wide
leadership across a broad spectrum of life sciences
research communities, where we work with our
international partners, other Federal agencies, and
the academic and private sector to develop the
knowledge that supports safe and healthy space
travel. Formal agreements between NASA, other
Federal agencies, academia, and our international
partners form the basis of decades-long joint re-
search activities on quantifying and mitigating the
effects of space travel on humans. The knowledge
gained with our partners will continue to inform
our design for safer deep-space exploration sys-
tems.
NASA will continue to focus on preparing humans
for the stresses of living and working for extended
periods in the hostile environment of space. As
humans explore further from Earth, many different
issues will arise and require investigation. NASA will
continue to study multiple human system challeng-
es, including bone and muscle loss, vision, health,
and wellness monitoring, and physical and mental
function maintenance. These activities have led
us to develop an exploration biomedical program
focused on several goals: informing human health,
performance, and habitability standards; develop-
ing countermeasures and risk-mitigation solutions;
and advancing habitability and medical-support
technologies. The 2021 report by the National
Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine
for managing cancer risks associated with radiation
exposure during crewed space missions¹ will help
inform future crew health and safety.
Contributing Programs and/or Program
Activities
Human Research Program; Human Space Flight
Operations.
1
Space Radiation and Astronaut Health: Managing and Com-
municating Cancer Risks, National Academies of Science, Engi-
neering, and Medicine, 2021.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
31
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
Strategic Objective 2.4
Enhance space access and services.
Meet the communication, launch service, and strategic capabilities needs of NASA's programs.
Lead Office
mission assurance efforts to ensure the great-
Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD)
est probability of launch mission success. LSP's
primary responsibility is to meet the needs of
Objective Overview
a diverse customer base spanning our Mission
The ability to provide cost-effective, mission-es-
Directorates, a wide range of educational organi-
sential services provides a stable foundation for
zations, and other customers. LSP is the Agency's
America's human and robotic missions. These ca-
recognized expert in all aspects of commercial
pabilities range from acquiring launch vehicles for
launch services, including acquisition, certifica-
U.S. Government civil sector and robotic missions,
tion, and mission management.
to communicating with both crewed missions
such as the International Space Station (ISS) in
NASA provides the critical communications and
low Earth orbit, the Artemis lunar missions, and
navigation services to our operational missions,
and we will continue to invest in critical technol-
uncrewed, scientific missions such as planetary
rovers on the surface of Mars.
ogies that will increase reliable communications
capabilities. NASA engages with the satellite com-
NASA provides safe, reliable, and cost-effective
munications industry to develop communications
launch services for NASA and NASA-sponsored
capabilities that supports U.S. needs, are globally
payloads seeking access to space on U.S. com-
competitive, and advance U.S. leadership in the
mercial launch vehicles. As the launch agent of
generation of new markets. Today, commercially
the U.S civil space sector, NASA relies on the
provided satellite communications continues to
Launch Services Program (LSP) to certify new
mature, and NASA envisions a commercial com-
commercial launch vehicles for readiness to fly
munications market where near-Earth customers
high-value spacecraft, and direct vital launch
will have access to suitable commercial services
and where NASA is one of many customers.
Below: A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket carrying NASA's Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE) spacecraft is seen at sunset on the launch pad at Launch
Complex 39A, December 8, 2021, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The IXPE spacecraft is the first satellite dedicated to measuring the polar-
ization of X-rays from a variety of cosmic sources, such as black holes and neutron stars. Image Credit: NASA/Joel Kowsky
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
Developing and testing rocket propulsion systems
is foundational to spaceflight. Whether the payload
is a robotic science experiment or a crewed mis-
sion, the propulsion system used to launch it must
be safe and reliable. Utilizing unique test facilities,
NASA ensures the safe and effective execution of a
rigorous engine test program, critical to any rocket
propulsion development activity.
Objective Strategy
NASA has an important role as a valued partner
and advisor to the U.S. commercial launch industry.
To ensure the U.S. launch industry continues to
grow and maintain a completive posture, NASA cer-
tifies new commercial launch vehicles for readiness
to fly high value spacecraft, performs key mission
Launched in December 2021, the Laser Communications Relay
design and launch integration activities, and directs
Demonstration will demonstrate optical communications capabilities for
future missions. Most spacecraft use radio frequency technology to com-
launch mission assurance efforts to ensure the
municate with Earth. Optical communications could increase bandwidth
greatest probability of launch mission success.
10-100 times more than radio frequency. (Artist Illustration) Image Credit:
NASA
The National Space Policy directs that we make
use of, rather than duplicate, commercially provid-
ed services. NASA has a diverse set of users and
communications needs against which commercial
desired outcomes while minimizing test time and
capabilities will be evaluated, such as launch vehi-
costs. NASA has a keen focus on streamlining fa-
cle support, visiting vehicles to ISS, human space
cility usage and eliminating redundant capabilities
flight, and science missions in Earth orbit, which
that keep this national asset available, as required,
range from flagship observatories to SmallSats and
by multiple customers and users.
CubeSats. NASA will systematically migrate near-
Earth missions from communications and naviga-
How NASA Engages and Works with
tion services provided by Government-ownec net-
Partners
works to commercial networks. NASA will continue
NASA continues to work with industry and aca-
to provide support to our users and envisions tran-
demia through a variety of partnerships, including
sitioning future space-relay users to commercial
numerous Space Act Agreements, focusing on
providers over the next decade.
rocket propulsion testing, space-based communi-
cations, launch system risk reduction, and other
NASA is investing in critical technologies that will
strategic capabilities. For example, executing a ro-
increase reliable communications capabilities and
bust and proven strategy, NASA achieves assured
transform NASA mission technology. Our strategy
access to space through a competitive "mixed fleet"
is guided by the ability to acquire and utilize ad-
approach that utilizes the breadth of U.S. indus-
vanced space capabilities to the maximum extent
try's capabilities. LSP provides expertise to NASA
possible. NASA's efforts in the continued develop-
payload missions who are using launch services
ment of communications technologies will enable,
through other Government agencies, the launch
improve, and mature available communication and
industry, or contributed by a foreign partner. NASA
navigation technologies for both ground and space-
collaborates extensively with the U.S. Space Force
based use. NASA will continue to leverage invest-
and other agencies in the areas of mission assur-
ments, experience, and accomplishments in many
ance, fleet surveillance, and acquisition strategy,
areas, including optical communications, building
and is an invaluable source of technical expertise
the initial technologies and capabilities required for
and insights across the U.S. commercial space in-
future space-based communications networks.
dustry.
NASA manages testing facilities across the Nation,
NASA's Rocket and Propulsion Test (RPT) program
where both our programs and U.S. industry con-
is responsible for managing and sustaining the
duct rocket engine and component tests under
Agency's expertise and facilities for ground testing
controlled conditions. Our decades of experience
of rocket engines. RPT provides vital propulsion
in rocket propulsion testing ensures the delivery of
data to validate initial designs, increase confidence
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
33
Strategic Goal 2
EXPLORE
in technical performance, reduce risks, and ensure
launch readiness in preparation for Artemis I and
Artemis II, as well as supporting the Commercial
Crew Program's milestones.
Contributing Programs and/or Program
Activities
Communications Services Program; Launch Ser-
vices; Rocket Propulsion Test; Space Communica-
tions and Navigation.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
34
Expedition 63
NASA astronaut and Expedition 63 Commander Chris Cassidy poses with two Astrobee robotic assistants during visual and navigation tests inside the Kibo
laboratory module from Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) Image Credit: NASA
STRATEGIO GOAL 3
CATALYZE ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
DRIVE INNOVATION TO ADDRESS
NATIONAL CHALLENGES.
Goal Statement
NASA drives economic development and growth through technological innovation. The National Aeronau-
tics and Space Act of 1958 specifically calls out this important theme, and since its inception NASA's invest-
ments have driven innovation, benefitting the U.S. economy and the American people. It was Apollo and
other U.S. space programs, with their need for large quantities of integrated circuit components, that led to
lower-cost production and provided a critical early boost to the growth of the American semiconductor in-
dustry. Similarly, NASA's early role in the development of satellite communications and remote sensing
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
eventually led to the emergence of the robust
air traffic operational procedures, and demonstrate
space-based market, spanning a broad range of
their potential to transform aviation into an eco-
commercial communication and data services.
nomic engine at all altitudes. The Agency is com-
mitted to cutting-edge research and technology to
Originally tied to keeping the Nation secure and
assure U.S. competitiveness in space and in flight.
advancing U.S. leadership in aeronautics, communi-
cations satellites, and Earth remote sensing, NASA's
NASA embraces competition and external partner-
mandate is broader today. The challenges NASA
ships to spur innovation and entrepreneurship. We
addresses relate to gathering climate change data;
partner with universities, small businesses, indus-
driving American innovation through aerospace
try, emerging commercial entities, individual inno-
research and development; developing commer-
vators, and other Government agencies. With a fo-
cial and human space launch, transportation, and
cus on reducing technology risks through research,
exploration capabilities; understanding cosmic phe-
transitioning promising concepts, and infusing
nomena as wide-ranging as space weather, aster-
NASA technologies into commercially viable prod-
oids, and exoplanets; supplying technological solu-
ucts and services, NASA furthers American techno-
tions that could also apply to terrestrial problems;
logical leadership through active engagement with
and improving the Nation's innovation capacity.
a diverse U.S. innovation community.
Today, NASA invests in a broad portfolio of both
Driving Economic Growth
space technology and aeronautics research, de-
Technology drives the aerospace economy.
velopment, and demonstration. We invest more
Through its space technology and aeronautics
than 80 percent of our funds in U.S. industry and
portfolios, NASA proactively works to drive U.S.
academia. Where possible, the Agency leverages
economic growth and job creation in the U.S. space
public-private partnerships, reducing development
industry by reducing research and development
costs, accelerating infusion of new technologies,
risks for U.S. companies; stimulating new business
meeting national needs, and potentially enabling
creation and maturation; removing barriers to en-
new markets. Each year, NASA creates over 1,000
try for new businesses to enter the market; supply-
new technologies, and the Agency works diligently
ing small businesses with training and expertise to
to ensure that the American people receive max-
grow in the marketplace; providing opportunities
imum benefit from those advancements through
for businesses to test and mature technologies in
patent licenses, software usage agreements, and
relevant environments; and building bridges for
other commercialization efforts.
industry to access technologies through licensing
technology and serving as an early customer to
Maintaining America's Global Standing
help jumpstart new markets.
In solving some of the most difficult technological
challenges our Nation faces in space and flight,
Addressing Climate Change
NASA serves as an innovation leader, sourcing
NASA research is directly contributing to the long-
ideas from a broad, diverse base of organizations
term sustainability of aviation, including reduction
and transferring technology into the aerospace
of greenhouse gas emissions and noise by de-
economy. NASA's technology investments help
veloping and testing new green technologies for
grow the U.S. industrial and academic base, con-
next-generation aircraft, new automation tools for
tinuing the Nation's economic leadership and
greener and safer airspace operations, and sus-
strengthening our national security.
tainable energy options for aircraft propulsion. We
In the coming years, NASA will advance space tech-
partner with industry, academia, and other Govern-
nologies that enable rapid, safe, and efficient trans-
ment agencies through the Sustainable Flight Na-
portation, as well as expanded access to diverse
tional Partnership to accomplish the aviation com-
surface destinations. We seek to enable a vibrant
munity's aggressive international carbon reduction
space economy with technological advancements
goals. For example, through our work in advanced
vehicle technologies, efficient airline operations,
that foster U.S. innovation and competitiveness,
and sustainable aviation fuels, we aim to potential-
drive economic growth and the creation of high
-paying U.S. jobs, and ensure national leadership
ly achieve net-zero aviation carbon emissions by
in space. Similarly, NASA is making significant con-
2050. We also invest in technologies that can re-
tributions to keep U.S. aviation the global leader in
duce greenhouse gases, provide new clean energy
alternatives, and improve climate observations and
safety, efficiency, and innovation. We explore ear-
ly-stage concepts, develop new technologies and
climate adaptation decision support.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
36
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
Strategic Objective 3.1
Innovate and advance transformational space technologies.
Develop revolutionary, high-payoff space technologies driven by diverse ideas to transform
NASA missions and ensure American leadership in the space economy.
Lead Office
As NASA embarks on its next era of discovery and
Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD)
exploration, the advancement of transformational
space technologies help guide the journey ahead.
Objective Overview
We invest in crosscutting and transformational
Technological leadership remains vital to our na-
technologies that have high potential for offset-
tional security, economic prosperity, and global
ting mission risk, reducing cost, and advancing
competitiveness. The Nation's continued econom-
existing or creating new capabilities. Our technol-
ic leadership is due in part to the technological
ogy investments enable NASA's science and hu-
investments made over time that enabled our
man exploration missions and foster growth and
country to emerge as a global technological lead-
job creation in domestic industries. We harness
er. That commitment accelerated the economy
innovation and entrepreneurship through part-
with the creation of new industries, products,
nerships with universities, small businesses, and
and services that yielded lasting benefits. Moving
other Government agencies, while also engaging
forward, a technology-driven NASA will continue
the broader public. Through leadership in space
to help fuel our Nation's economic engine and
technology, NASA will contribute to growing the
support the creation of jobs for decades to come,
U.S. industrial and academic base by transferring
while also providing valuable breakthroughs for
space technology into the space economy, con-
NASA's missions and the commercial space indus-
tinuing the Nation's global economic leadership,
try. In short, technology drives the space econo-
and strengthening our national security.
my.
Below: Members of NASA's Mars 2020 project install the Mars Oxygen In-Situ Resource Utilization Experiment (MOXIE) into the chassis of NASA's next
Mars rover. MOXIE will demonstrate a way that future explorers might produce oxygen from the Martian atmosphere for propellant and for breathing. The
car-battery-sized instrument does this by collecting carbon dioxide from the Martian atmosphere and electrochemically splitting the carbon dioxide molecules
into oxygen and carbon monoxide molecules. The oxygen is then analyzed for purity before being vented back out to the Martian atmosphere
along
with
the
carbon monoxide and other exhaust products. Image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
In the coming years, NASA will advance technol-
ogies that enable rapid, safe, and efficient trans-
portation as well as expanded access to diverse
surface destinations. We seek to enable a vibrant
space economy with supporting utilities and com-
modities through investments in in-situ resource
utilization, sustainable power systems, and auton-
omous construction. NASA will invest in technol-
ogies to enable long duration human exploration
missions and those that transform our missions
and discoveries by investing in high performance
computing, advanced robotics, satellite servicing
and assembly, in-space manufacturing, and new
vehicle platform technologies that are more rapid,
affordable, and capable. These technological ad-
vancements will foster U.S. innovation and compet-
itiveness, drive economic growth and the creation
of good-paying jobs, and ensure national leader-
ship in space.
NASA also continues to advance climate and clean
A NASA technology that could one day help land humans on Mars is under
energy technology innovations. We emphasize
development and will be tested in 2022. The Low-Earth Orbit Flight Test of
reducing greenhouse gas emissions (including
an Inflatable Decelerator (LOFTID)will demonstrate entry of an aeroshell
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and hy-
from low-Earth orbit. This technology enables a variety of proposed NASA
drofluorocarbons); production of clean energy;
missions to destinations such as Mars, Venus, Titan as well as return to
sustainable aviation; climate science observations;
Earth.
and harnessing data for climate research. We will
formulate new prizes, topics within the Small Busi-
ness Innovation Research and Small Business Tech-
nology Transfer programs, and grant opportunities
tion, we are more effective in transferring new
to address climate challenges and the clean energy
transformative technologies and capabilities within
economy. In addition, NASA will be supporting
NASA, the U.S. Government, and throughout indus-
Earth-observing capabilities for Small Spacecraft
try and academia.
platforms to support breakthrough science and Na-
tional efforts to address climate change.
NASA's technology portfolio has grown significant-
ly in recent years, and enhancements in portfolio
In addition, NASA will be supporting Earth-observ-
management processes and functions are required
ing capabilities for small spacecraft platforms to
to continue effective and efficient operations. We
support breakthrough science and national efforts
focus on evidence-based decision making as part of
to address climate change.
our success strategy. Continuous improvement of
data management enables us to have a more com-
Objective Strategy
plete understanding of the vast array of projects
Working closely with stakeholders, enlisting part-
within our portfolio, allowing for the investigation
nerships, utilizing evidence-based decision making,
of technology development history to inform fu-
and promoting diversity, equity, inclusion, and ac-
ture investment decisions. Strategic implementa-
cessibility are all key to our strategy.
tion planning remains an integral component of
meeting our objectives. Moving forward, focused,
To balance near-, mid-, and long-term technology
outcome-based requirements and documentation
requirements we employ a merit-based competi-
will inform quantitative analysis of technology gaps
tion model, with a portfolio approach spanning a
range of discipline areas and technology readiness
and provide guidance for future investments.
levels. Integration across programs is key to iden-
NASA promotes diversity, equity, inclusion, and ac-
tifying and successfully transitioning and trans-
cessibility, guided by Executive Orders 13985 and
ferring new capabilities. By working with potential
14041, through supporting participation by under-
stakeholders up front and continuously engaging
served communities in its technology programs.
through conception, maturation, and demonstra-
A key element of our strategy is inspiring and
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
38
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
developing a diverse and powerful U.S. aerospace
ers, NASA encourages future commercial markets
technology workforce. We remain focused on in-
in the process of developing new capabilities. NASA
creasing the diversity of our innovation community.
invests in high-risk, high-reward activities across
Accordingly, our space technology programs partic-
the technology development spectrum through our
ipate in the NASA Science, Technology, Engineering,
partnerships.
and Mathematics (STEM) Engagement Minority
University Research and Education Project (MUREP)
NASA understands the future of American lead-
to engage and support Minority Serving Institu-
ership in space depends on a national aerospace
tions (MSIs), including Historically Black Colleges
technology workforce comprised of inventors and
and Universities (HBCUs). Through MUREP, NASA
innovators across a wide spectrum of disciplines in
reaches scientists, engineers, and students from
addition to technologists and engineers that tackle
underserved and underrepresented communities.
the hard problems that space presents, and our
For example, in 2021, NASA awarded grants, up to
partnerships spur growth in these disciplines. We
$50,000 each, to 11 MSIs to foster partnerships be-
also recognize that diversity of thought and back-
tween those institutions and U.S. small businesses
ground, and cross-disciplinary perspectives are
while also potentially lowering the barriers of entry
critical to the Nation's success and that working to
to participation in NASA's Small Business Technol-
attain equity must include building better bridges
ogy Transfer program. We also recently launched
to underserved and underrepresented communi-
a pilot initiative with the MSI STEM Research and
ties, so no talent is missed in achieving our national
Development Consortium aimed at increasing MSI
space technology objectives.
participation in Federal research. Additionally, our
annual "Technology Infusion Road Tour" reached
Contributing Programs and/or Program
representatives from MSIs to share insight and
Activities
strategies on how to pursue procurement and tech-
Early-Stage Innovation and Partnerships; Small
nical opportunities with the Agency. Moving for-
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small
ward, our Early-Stage Innovation and Partnerships,
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Program ;
Technology Maturation, and Technology Demon-
Technology Demonstration; Technology Matura-
stration portfolios will continue to explore new ap-
tion.
proaches to increase participation by underserved
communities.
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
To ensure American leadership in the space econ-
omy, NASA aggressively pursues critical technology
gaps and global space technology leadership. We
embrace competition and external partnerships
that spur innovation and entrepreneurship. We
create partnerships with universities, small busi-
nesses, industry, emerging commercial entities,
individual innovators, and other Government
agencies to meet NASA mission needs and support
commercial expansion in space. We also welcome
opportunities to work with our international part-
ners on shared priorities. With a focus on infusing
NASA technologies into commercial products and
services, we actively engage our stakeholders to
help define investment content and identify oppor-
tunities where technological advances can enable
a commercially viable product or service. We utilize
multiple mechanisms to partner with industry,
including public-private partnerships through con-
tracts and Space Act Agreements. By sharing the
risk and financial stakes with the private sector,
other Government agencies and internal stakehold-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
39
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
Strategic Objective 3.2
Drive efficient and sustainable aviation.
Lead aviation innovation to enable safe and sustainable air transportation through
revolutionary vehicle advances and efficient flight operations.
Lead Office
product created and purchased today (from toys
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate (ARMD)
to groceries) is touched by aviation in some way.
Speed, convenience, and economic benefits from
Objective Overview
air transportation are the primary factors in its
Air transportation is an integral part of modern
rapid growth; benefits that have been even more
life, providing safe, affordable, and convenient
important during the COVID-19 pandemic.
travel to the public. Consequently, it has become
an integral part of the U.S. and global economy.
NASA's research contributes significantly to the
In a 2020 economic impact report¹ published by
aviation sector in improving its safety, efficiency,
the Federal Aviation Administration, air trans-
and resulting economic well-being of the Nation.
Our role is to reduce the risk inherent in innova-
portation² provided $78 billion of positive trade
balance for the U.S. manufacturing sector, 10.9
tive concepts. We explore early-stage concepts
million direct and indirect jobs and 21.3 billion
and ideas, develop new aviation technologies and
tons of freight by the U.S. airlines culminating
air traffic operational procedures, and demon-
in $1.8 trillion of total U.S. economic activity (8.6
strate their potential in a relevant environment.
percent of the 2018 U.S. Gross Domestic Product).
The Agency is steadfast in its commitment to cut-
Of the 10.9 million jobs, over one million were
ting-edge research and technology development
high-quality manufacturing jobs. Nearly every
and demonstration to assure U.S. competitive-
ness in the aviation sector.
1
2020 Economic Impact Report
2 Pre-Covid-19
Below: An ultra-efficient aircraft shape called the "transonic truss-braced wing" undergoes testing in NASA's 14'x22 wind tunnel at Langley Research Center
in Virginia. The unique design of its wing reduces drag during flight, which in turn reduces fuel consumption by up to 10 percent. Further development and
testing of this concept are taking place under NASA's Sustainable Flight National Partnership, which is expanding research to enable more sustainable
aviation. Image credit NASA
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
Objective Strategy
To continue NASA's leadership in aviation innova-
tion and enable a revolutionary transformation of
the aviation system, NASA is focused on six major
research areas, or Thrusts, for the long-term future
of aviation. These research Thrusts utilize the full
capability of our in-house aeronautics expertise.
Through high-risk, high-reward research and tech-
nology development, NASA seeks to enable:
Safe and efficient growth in global
operations;
Innovation in commercial supersonic aircraft;
Ultra-efficient subsonic transports;
Safe, quiet, and affordable vertical lift air
vehicles;
In-time system-wide safety assurance; and
Assured autonomy for aviation
transformation.
Each Thrust is designed to address an important
area of research and technology development that
will further U.S. leadership in the aviation industry
and enhance global mobility. This research is per-
formed with an emphasis on multi-disciplinary col-
laboration focused on the critical, integrated chal-
lenges aligned to the six research Thrusts-what
NASA refers to as convergent research. Together,
these research Thrusts combine to enable safe,
sustainable growth in the overall global aviation
The X-59 QueSST (Quiet SuperSonic Technology) aircraft will fly at
supersonic speeds above communities during the Low-Boom Flight
system, while pioneering transformative capabili-
Demonstration mission, generating sonic "thumps" instead of booms.
ties that will create revolutionary opportunities.
Image credit: NASA/Lockheed Martin
NASA works with partners in other Government
agencies, industry, and academia to support inno-
vative concepts and technologies, and with inter-
regard. ULI represents a new type of interaction
national counterparts to leverage complementary
with the university community, where universi-
investments.
ties take the lead, build their own teams, and set
their own research path. Under this initiative, we
How NASA Engages and Works with
explicitly require proposing university teams to in-
Partners
clude MSIs and HBCUs and continue to encourage
NASA is committed to increasing diversity and
women faculty members to apply. We also leverage
broadening representation in the Nation's aero-
Minority University Research and Education Project
nautics research and development enterprise, both
(MUREP) funded by NASA Office of Science, Tech-
internal and external to NASA. We engage with the
nology, Engineering and Mathematics.
private sector and academia in research activities
through solicitations such as the NASA Research
Partnerships with other Government, industry, ac-
Announcements. We encourage participation by
ademia, and foreign aeronautics agencies leverage
academic institutions that serve underrepresent-
ARMD's investments through joint efforts that com-
ed and minority groups through active outreach
plement NASA's internal capabilities, provide access
to professional organizations for women and to
to a wide range of technologies beyond the tradi-
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and Historically
tional aeronautics portfolio, and facilitate technolo-
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) informing
gy transfer to more mature states of development
them about NASA's portfolio and upcoming oppor-
and eventual implementation. Integrated technolo-
tunities. ARMD's University Leadership Initiative
gy demonstrations typically include selected indus-
(ULI) is one notable example of our efforts in this
try or Government partners who contribute their
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
41
Strategic Goal 3
INNOVATE
own funding or knowledge. These partnerships also
give ARMD deep insight into the goals and needs of
the aviation community, as well as providing user
feedback and facilitating industry engagement ear-
ly in the technology development cycle.
ARMD collaborates closely with the Federal Aviation
Administration to support their decision making
and to improve the performance of the National
Airspace System (NAS), as well as with the Depart-
ment of Defense and other Government agencies
to leverage technology investments. Industry part-
nerships allow rapid insertion of NASA aeronautics
research results into air vehicles and subsystems,
and NAS operations, tools, and processes. Partner-
ships with domestic academic institutions support
cutting-edge research on emerging aviation tech-
nologies and on the education of new researchers
in various fields of study. To help address the glob-
al nature of air transportation, ARMD also forges
partnerships with a wide range of international
Government entities, such as the International Fo-
rum for Aviation Research.
Contributing Programs and/or Program
Activities
Advanced Air Vehicles Program; Transformative
Aero Concepts Program; Integrated Aviation Sys-
tems Program; Airspace Operations and Safety
Program; and Aerosciences Evaluation and Test
Capabilities.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
42
NASA
LAUNCH
AMERICA
The Kennedy Space Center's Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) is one of the largest buildings in the world. The high bay is big enough to hold the massive
Space Launch System rocket boosters stacked on top of the mobile launcher. The high bay doors are 456 feet high. Image credit: NASA/Kim
Shiflett
STRATEGIC GOAL a
ENHANCE CAPABILITIES AND OPERATIONS
TO CATALYZE CURRENT AND FUTURE
MISSION SUCCESS.
Goal Statement
NASA's complex and bold missions require modern, adaptable technical and professional support capabil-
ities to enable mission readiness, resilience, and our continued leadership in science, exploration, discov-
ery, and innovation. The pace of change and innovation in aerospace is increasing, and NASA must deliver
critical support capabilities for mission success. We will pursue the goal of enhancing capabilities and op-
erations to ensure that NASA has the right people, infrastructure, technology, and technical excellence and
oversight needed to advance the Agency into the Artemis era and beyond.
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
A diverse workforce, empowered in an equitable,
are mission-ready, reliable, and affordable. NASA
inclusive, and accessible environment, is a key
will also rebuild and right-size our infrastructure
requirement for ensuring Agency success in the
and technical capabilities to support hybrid work
era of commercialized space. Diversity encourag-
environments, accessibility, environmental stew-
es new thought, inclusion ensures engagement,
ardship, and sustainability.
and accessibility creates a platform where all can
participate. Together, these are key elements that
NASA will transform and modernize our mission
spark innovation and ensure the Agency's ability
support capabilities to address rapidly changing
to generate the best ideas and solutions to novel
information technology (IT), tools, expanding data
and unprecedented challenges. To support our
collection, analysis and dissemination, and evolv-
Core Value of Inclusion, we will implement a robust
ing cybersecurity threats. Digital technologies will
and systematic strategy to ensure diversity, equity,
improve the way that we work and collaborate
inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) for the benefit of
internally and with our partners, increasing the
all, internal and external to NASA. In addition to ful-
effectiveness of our business processes and de-
filling presidential directives and executive orders,
livering better experiences and more value to our
NASA will continuously promote the incorporation
customers. NASA will continue pursuit of robotic
and transformation of DEIA into our culture and
process automation, data-driven decision lenses,
business practices at all levels of the Agency.
enhanced cloud offerings and artificial intelligence
at scale where possible while ensuring security, cre-
NASA and the Nation need a diverse and skilled
dentialing, and privacy standards are maintained.
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
Improvements to NASA's cybersecurity measures,
(STEM) workforce today and in the future. We are
including new applications, encryption, and IT in-
committed to engaging, inspiring, and attracting
frastructure, will protect vital assets against threats
future generations of explorers and building a di-
from malicious actors. As technology's role in the
verse future STEM workforce through a broad set
workplace continues to expand with a hybrid work-
of programs, projects, internship opportunities,
force, NASA's IT services are vital to enabling and
activities, and products that connect students to
protecting the Agency's work.
NASA's mission, work, and people, whether in-per-
son or virtually.
NASA already published tens of thousands of data-
sets, numerous open-sourced code projects, and
Competition for top STEM talent, along with other
data in other forms, including imagery, that is read-
business and professional skillsets needed at NASA,
ily accessible for application developers. NASA will
is increasing, and an ever-increasing portion of our
work to provide equitable access to datasets and
current civil service workforce is retirement eligible.
other NASA-developed information, including ad-
Meanwhile, top talent expects hybrid work expe-
dressing barriers and biases that may make access
riences that allow flexibility around where, when,
difficult for people from underserved groups and
and how they work best. To address these factors,
users that have not traditionally used NASA data
we will equip our people for the growing explora-
Democratizing data enables teachers, students,
tion, science, and aerospace economy through a
researchers, and other Government agencies to
focus on innovation, digital skill set development,
promote data literacy, data driven decision making,
and increased team agility (through hybrid collab-
and the sharing of best practices.
oration tools and other innovations). We will also
implement modern human capital solutions and
In alignment with our Core Values, assuring safety,
policies to attract, hire, and retain our talented
security, and mission success remains an Agen-
workforce.
cy priority, especially as mission complexity and
integration with industry increases, and as the
NASA also recognizes that a modern physical in-
aerospace environment in which we operate rap-
frastructure that will foster innovation is key in
idly changes. We will focus on evolving our safety,
attracting, retaining, and supporting top talent to
health and medical, and engineering oversight poli-
meet mission needs and be an employer of choice
cies and practices to protect the Agency, public, and
for years to come. NASA's physical infrastructure
orbital and planetary environments from potential
and technology support our missions. However,
harm, while reaching mission success through in-
much of NASA's physical infrastructure dates back
novative technical excellence.
to the Apollo era and is well beyond design life. We
will utilize a mission-driven, technology-enablec
NASA will maintain and enhance our mission sup-
approach to ensure critical capabilities and assets
port capabilities that enable us to engage in mu-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
44
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
tually beneficial partnerships with other Federal
for advancing environmental justice, as well as
agencies, U.S. industry, academia, nonprofit orga-
potential partnership opportunities with organiza-
nizations, state and local Governments, and inter-
tions currently working on environmental issues.
national entities that contribute to and support the
Through these efforts, we seek the fair treatment
Agency's Strategic Objectives and Mission.
and meaningful involvement of all people regard-
less of race, color, ethnicity, gender, national or-
Finally, NASA is committed to inspiring an informed
igin, or income with respect to the development,
society by engaging the broadest audience possi-
implementation, and advancement of policies,
ble, connecting with audiences outside of our tradi-
knowledge, solutions, collaborations, partnerships,
tional space community to expand the awareness
and the mitigation where possible of the effects of
of space, and effectively tell the stories that bring
climate change on all people to which people are
focus to our work, people, and value in everyday
entitled under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
life.
Through our STEM Engagement strategy, NASA will
Maintaining America's Global Standing
support student learning experiences and dedicat-
NASA's contributions to the Nation's leadership
ed competitive opportunities for climate research
in science, exploration, discovery, and innovation
capacity building at minority-serving institutions.
have been enabled by the foundation of mission
Additionally, the STEM Engagement Internship pro-
support services and infrastructure created by
gram will support NASA climate change researchers
NASA.
through mentor-guided student intern experiences.
Addressing Climate Change
NASA will continue to implement and improve sus-
tainable best practices and outcomes in the man-
agement of our facilities, fleet, and cross-cutting
operations, as well as our compliance with environ-
mental laws. The NASA Mission Support Directorate
and Office of Strategic Infrastructure will play key
roles in the implementation of the NASA Climate
Action Plan. NASA is developing an Agency Resil-
ience Framework that will include adaptation to cli-
mate change. The framework will be integrated into
the Agency Master Plan and Center Master Plans.
The Agency Resilience Framework will provide guid-
ance for development of Center Resilience Plans
that will include a process for identifying threats,
vulnerabilities, and risks; developing adaptation
strategies; and prioritizing adaptation actions.
NASA will continue to invest in data management
and collaboration capabilities to support collec-
tion, storage, processing, and appropriate sharing
of information internally and externally to enable
climate change analysis. We are dedicated to min-
limizing our mission and operational impacts on
the environment and our use of natural resources.
To ensure we uphold these high standards, share
best practices, and promote transparency, we will
continue to publish and implement NASA's annual
Sustainability Report and Implementation Plan and
other climate data.
Promoting Racial and Economic Equity
The NASA Office of Diversity and Equal Opportuni-
ty will work with all NASA Mission Directorates to
help identify current barriers to and opportunities
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
45
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
Strategic Objective 4.1
Attract and develop a talented and diverse workforce.
Cultivate a diverse, motivated, and highly qualified workforce through modernizing our
Human Capital processes and systems, increasing our workforce agility and flexibilities,
and implementing a robust Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility (DEIA) approach to
ensure systematic and sustainable fairness, impartiality, and equity in our business practices.
Lead Office
ment-eligible civil servants over the next five years
Mission Support Directorate (MSD) and the Office
and increasing competition for highly qualified
of Diversity and Equal Opportunity
science, technology, engineering, and mathemat-
ics (STEM) talent, especially as more commercial
Objective Overview
entities enter the field.
NASA will modernize how we attract, hire, sup-
port, lead, and retain the quality, diversity, and
While NASA has long enjoyed a reputation of
depth of talent necessary for mission success. Re-
attracting top talent; we recognize the value of
cent experiences and lessons from the pandemic,
recruiting and employing a diverse workforce
as well as nationwide workforce and workplace
cannot be understated. The Agency is better po-
sitioned to fulfill its current and future missions
trends, will inform and help NASA institutionalize
and improve our hybrid work practices. NASA's
when we intentionally invite people with different
modernization strategy will also address other
backgrounds, who show promise and potential,
factors such as an increasing number of retire-
into spaces to inspire and challenge us to think
and work differently.
Below: Diana Trujillo, an aerospace engineer, is Technical Group Supervisor for Sequence Planning and Execution and a Tactical Mission Lead for the Mars
Perseverance rover. Born and raised in Colombia, Trujillo immigrated to the United States at the age of 17 to pursue her dream of working for NASA. In this
photograph, Trujillo celebrates the completion of a successful shift as flight director. She is pointing at an image taken by the Perseverance Rover on the
surface of Mars of the successful deployment of Ingenuity, the first helicopter ever delivered to the surface of another planet. Image Credit: NASA
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
In 2020, NASA added Inclusion to our Core Values,
recognizing that inclusion is intrinsic to our work,
our relationships, and our achievements. Inclusion
increases collaboration and productivity. Addition-
ally, it encourages employees to go above-and-be-
yond to achieve our goals. Also, all people want to
feel a sense of inclusion and belonging. Inclusion
happens when people can have psychological
safety in being their authentic selves, sharing their
ideas, knowledge, creativity, and innovation. The
combination of all our values and the emphasis on
Inclusion lets NASA strive to have a healthy culture
and be an employer of choice.
Objective Strategy
NASA will continue to instill DEIA and other human
capital best practices to modernize how we hire,
retain, and develop our distributed and digitally
enabled workforce. NASA will continuously improve
our hiring and onboarding processes to enable
In support of the Administration's Executive Orders concerning DEIA,
our managers and human capital professionals to
NASA will enhance our capabilities to identify barriers and mitigate their
employ the right people, when and where they are
negative impacts on increasing diversity and inclusion, engaging under-
needed to meet mission needs today and in the
served populations, and advancing environmental justice.
future. We will develop our people to meet evolv-
ing mission needs through increasing partnership
opportunities with academia, and others, as well
multiple gender and racial identities, include di-
as through experiential rotations and meaningful
verse professional and education experiences, and
leadership development assignments.
lead to a greater diversity of thought which enables
NASA will cultivate a workforce that is more agile
our workforce to provide premier support to our
and responsive to changing skill demands and
aerospace, science, technology, and exploration
requirements. Through effective and strategic
missions.
workforce planning we will align workforce require-
NASA enthusiastically supports the Administration's
ments directly to the Agency's Strategic Plan. In ad-
emphasis on DEIA to address social and political
dition, we will identify gaps between competencies
issues that need national and local attention and
the workforce currently possesses and future re-
solutions. NASA is committed to inspiring and facil-
quirements. Lastly, we will identify and implement
itating an environment in which DEIA standards are
gap reduction strategies such as: continuing to use
expected in our operations. To that end, our multi-
contractors and term-limited appointments, lever-
prong strategy includes:
aging NASA Excepted Employment appointments
or temporary workers to meet current specific mis-
Committing the Agency to action that fulfills
sion requirements, and ensuring we maintain a sta-
Presidential directives (e.g., Executive Orders
ble workforce to meet future demands. We will use
(see Appendix E), memoranda, etc.) and
Agency-specific direct hiring and term appointment
other Federal guidance and/or policies;
authorities for the civil servant workforce to pro-
Sustaining creative engagement to
vide us the flexibility to optimally align competency
inspire and promote incorporation and
and skill requirements to future mission needs.
transformation of DEIA in our culture and
customary business practices at the Agency,
We will transform our culture, policies, and tools to
Center, organization, and individual levels;
foster productive hybrid work environments that
Continuing our cross-collaborations
help NASA attract and retain a diverse, motivated,
with other agencies, such as the Equal
and highly qualified workforce. Informed by lessons
Employment Opportunity Commission,
learned from the pandemic and nationwide work-
Department of Justice, and the Office
force and workplace trends, our remote work and
of Personnel Management for DEIA
telework options will be balanced now and in the
policy guidance, and reaching out to the
future, to promote inclusive teams that incorporate
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
47
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
Department of Homeland Security and the
NASA believes that focusing a portion of recruit-
Department of Defense to benchmark best
ment efforts on early careerists and offering more
practices in DEIA, and;
remote and telework options will attract new,
Updating performance goals beginning in
diverse applicant markets. We will also seek to un-
FY 2022 to align with this Strategic Objective.
derstand the expectations and needs across our
five generations of workers to maximize the use of
Alignment with Federal Workforce and
programs such as term-limited employment that
DEIA Priorities, and Related Executive
can tap part time, job-sharing options for those
Orders
not seeking full-time employment, and our phased
NASA will align human capital practices to support
retirement and Emeritus programs to maximize
the strategies outlined in the President's Manage-
knowledge transfer and mentoring from our senior
ment Agenda, place DEIA as a central norm of the
careerists more fully. In addition, we are expand-
workplace, and support Executive Orders con-
ing internal job rotation and detail assignments
cerning DEIA. Our programs seek to address un-
by creating more "virtual/remote" opportunities
der-representation based on race, ethnicity, gender
that do not require physical relocation to provide
identity, sexual orientation, tribal affiliation, and
broader career development opportunities across
socioeconomics.
all Centers. Finally, we will expand our ability to un-
derstand workforce perspectives in real time by im-
The Agency has already begun revising and updat-
plementing ongoing pulse surveys, analyzing data
ing its internal policies and guidelines, including a
from new-hire, Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey,
NASA Policy Statement on DEIA will enable NASA to
and exit surveys, and piloting new techniques such
achieve several objectives, including:
as chatbots.
Reinforcing NASA's historical commitment to
NASA will also implement or increase the availabil-
improve DEIA;
ity and use of DEIA training programs for employ-
Providing notification to NASA employees of
ees, managers, and leadership. Such training pro-
their DEIA rights and responsibilities;
grams should enable knowledge of systemic and
Taking proactive steps to prevent
institutional racism and bias against underserved
discrimination, retaliation, and harassment
communities, provide support in building skillsets
in order to avoid and mitigate legal liability;
to promote respectful and inclusive workplaces
and
and eliminate workplace harassment, and increase
Complying with the U.S. Equal Employment
understanding of implicit and unconscious bias, the
Opportunity Commission's Management
effects and impact of privilege, historic discrimina-
Directive 715 requirement for the annual
tion, and misrepresentation.
issuance of an equal employment
opportunity policy statement by the head of
Contributing Programs and/or Program
each agency.
Activities
Mission Enabling Services.
NASA will evaluate the current state of DEIA across
the Agency and the workforce, and subsequently
prepare an Agency DEIA Plan. This will also be fol-
lowed by annual reports on the status of Agency
efforts as required in Executive Order 14035 and in-
cludes efforts to incorporate guidance set forth by
OMB. Working in concert with OMB, other Govern-
ment agencies, and councils organized by the Ad-
ministration, we seek to be a leading partner with
other Government counterparts. A cornerstone of
this planning will be collecting and analyzing com-
prehensive data, or leveraging existing data, related
to diversity in overall workforce composition, senior
workforce composition, employment applications,
hiring decisions and applicant flow, promotions,
pay and compensation, professional development
programs, and attrition.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
48
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
Strategic Objective 4.2
Transform mission support capabilities for the next era of
aerospace.
Re-build, modernize, and right-size NASA's mission enabling capabilities to ensure mission
readiness and cultivate a reliable foundation for the future innovations in aerospace and
science.
Lead Office
mis era, we must strengthen our technical author-
Mission Support Directorate (MSD)
ities and modernize our physical and information
technology (IT) infrastructure. NASA will focus on
Objective Overview
the following three priority areas:
As NASA's missions evolve and increasingly inte-
grate with industry, and hybrid workforces and
Strengthen NASA's Agency Technical
workplaces become the norm, mission support
Authorities
requirements will change. In alignment with NA-
Modernize infrastructure and technical
SA's Core Values, mission support's top priority is
capabilities
ensuring mission success-safely and securely.
Support our workforce and programs with
This is increasingly challenging with the growing
secure, innovative technology
complexity of our missions. Much of NASA's in-
frastructure is from the Apollo-era. It is time to
Objective Strategy
re-build, modernize, and right-size NASA's mis-
Strengthen NASA's Agency Technical Author-
sion-enabling capabilities.
ities - Protect the Agency, public, and orbital and
planetary environments from potential harm, while
To advance an environment of inclusion, integrity,
reaching mission success through innovative techni-
teamwork, and excellence required for the Arte-
cal excellence.
Below: Chief of the Test, Launch and Recovery Operations Branch within the Exploration Ground Systems Program Jeremy Graeber, (left) and Artemis I
Launch Director Charlie Blackwell-Thompson (right), along with civil servant and contractor members of the Artemis I launch team, monitor activities during
the ninth formal terminal countdown simulation inside Firing Room 1 in the Launch Control Center at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida on June 24,
2021. This is part of a series of simulations to help the team prepare for the launch of Artemis I, the uncrewed first flight of the Space Launch System rocket
and Orion spacecraft. Image credit: NASA/Kim Shiflett
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
With increasing mission complexity and a rapidly
changing aerospace industry, NASA must evolve
policies and practices that continue to protect the
health and safety of our workforce and the public.
NASA must also mitigate the technical risk to our
missions and the space environment. NASA's Agen-
cy Technical Authorities advise Agency leaders and
partners on programmatic and technical readiness
and risk to ensure mission success. They must have
the tools to ensure safety, security, and technical
excellence objectives are met. The Agency Techni-
cal Authority role remains crucial and will play an
important role in NASA's future missions, partner-
ships, and status as a leader in aerospace.
NASA is evolving mission enabling and oversight
capabilities to successfully implement our missions
in human exploration, climate research, and other
A Marshall Space Flight Center transportation specialist stands alongside
objectives. Specifically, NASA will:
two new, fully electric cars using Marshall's 240-volt charging station.
NASA is acquiring zero emission vehicles (ZEV) and charging infrastruc-
Advance our ability to identify and mitigate
ture to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in our fleet operations and align
new risks to personnel, both on the ground
with the President's goal of achieving a fully ZEV Federal fleet.
and in flight, as we continue to provide
innovative support capabilities in aerospace,
science, technology, and exploration to both
mental stewardship, sustainability, and enhancing
protect and enhance performance across
resource conservation efforts.
our entire workforce and our partners.
Resilient and ready infrastructure is critical for
Modernize our policies, standards, tools, and
mission success. Much of NASA's current infrastruc-
expertise to ensure that health and safety,
ture dates back to Apollo-era space exploration,
security, and mission assurance practices
with 83 percent of facilities beyond design life. The
are adaptable and woven into the design
demands on the NASA infrastructure continue to
and development of increasingly complex
increase as our commercial partnerships increase
missions and operations by NASA and its
and our missions become more complex. NASA will
partners.
prioritize and transform our asset management to
Increase organizational resilience by assuring
ensure that our mission critical infrastructure and
success through independent assessments
facilities are available and reliable in the Artemis
and evaluations of mission threats through
era and beyond.
the development and dissemination of
mitigation strategies.
Guided by our Agency Master Planning process,
Continue to foster relationships with other
we are taking an Agency-wide and mission-driven
Government agencies, such as the Federal
approach to ensure critical capabilities and assets
Aviation Administration and Space Force,
are mission-ready, reliable, and affordable. At the
industry leaders, and international partners
same time, we are investing in the long-term asset
through interagency, Government-industry
health, sustainability, and physical footprint reduc-
and international working groups and
tions that ensure NASA's future mission success.
committees aimed at the advancement of
This mission-driven approach, utilizing data-driven
space industry practices, reduction of risk
and risk-informed methodologies, will ensure that
by implementing medical policy related to
NASA prioritizes sustainment and investment in
spaceflight, and state-of-the-art advances
mission critical infrastructure, divestment of un-
in aviation and spaceflight health and
needed infrastructure, and the leasing of assets to
performance.
commercial partners where practical. We will con-
tinue our right-sizing efforts by demolishing and
Modernize infrastructure and technical capabil-
eliminating obsolete facilities to reduce our overall
ities - Rebuild and right-size NASA's infrastructure and
physical footprint, resource consumption, mainte-
technical capabilities to advance the Nation's science
nance costs, and aging infrastructure risk, as well
and aerospace leadership, while supporting environ-
as enable our ability to re-new and rebuild modern
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
50
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
and sustainable infrastructure to support future
active and resilient cybersecurity, all supported by
mission success.
engaged, customer-focused IT teams.
We will also continue to implement and improve
This transformation will depend on the harmoni-
sustainable best practices and outcomes in the
zation of business practices across NASA's centers
management of our facilities, fleet, and cross-cut-
to reach effectiveness and efficiency goals. Timely,
ting operations, as well as our compliance with en-
secure data sharing and support for the Agency's
vironmental laws. NASA is committed to sustained
partnerships with industry remain critical to the
(year-over-year) reduction of our overall energy
success of NASA's missions. Modernization of the
and water consumption. By identifying and quan-
Agency's IT infrastructure will enable seamless, reli-
tifying facilities which are significant energy users
able, and secure collaboration across NASA's work-
and developing initiatives to reduce energy and
force and partners and will foster innovation in our
water consumption in these facilities, eliminating
expanding digital environment.
unneeded and redundant facilities, and reducing
our carbon footprint as we transform to increasing-
As IT evolves globally, cybersecurity threats are
ly hybrid work environments and fully transition to
increasing in frequency and sophistication. This
a zero-emission vehicle Federal fleet.
trend has the potential to exploit the complexity
and interconnectedness of NASA's systems and
NASA will establish, implement, and manage an
data, placing the Agency's missions at risk. We
Agency-level plan to better align aircraft opera-
will reinforce our operational resilience through
tional capabilities with NASA mission requirements
strategic cybersecurity risk management and by
across the Agency, strategically manage our air-
modernizing IT capabilities. We will support our
craft capabilities to meet long-term Agency needs,
geographically hybrid workforce seamlessly and se-
and support NASA's leadership in aerospace and
curely while strengthening the security and privacy
science. The domain of this plan includes NASA air-
of our data. NASA's transition to an enterprise op-
craft, associated infrastructure, support equipment,
erating model for IT will amplify these outcomes by
Unmanned Aircraft Systems, and the acquisition
strengthening customer engagement, service plan-
of Commercial Aircraft Services. This more robust,
ning and delivery, and cost-effective management.
responsive, and agile approach to aircraft capa-
bility management and development will enable
Contributing Programs and/or Program
the Agency to optimally deploy aircraft capabilities
Activities
and resources when and where needed, prioritize
Priority Area 1: Agency Technical Authority; Center
sustainment of current NASA aircraft capabilities,
Engineering, Safety, & Operations
and support investment and divestment decisions.
It will also empower the Agency to better leverage
Priority Area 2: Infrastructure & Technical Capabili-
commercial and other Government aircraft capa-
ties; Exploration Construction of Facilities (CoF); In-
bilities to support achievement of NASA strategic
stitutional CoF; Science CoF; Space Operations CoF;
goals and objectives.
Environmental Compliance and Restoration
Support our workforce and programs with
Priority Area 3: Information Technology
secure, innovative technology - Address rapidly
changing IT, expanding data collections, and increas-
Contributing Support Program: Mission Enabling
ing cybersecurity threats
Services
NASA depends heavily on secure digital processes,
technology, and accessible data to achieve mis-
sion success. The Agency will transform business
processes, IT, and data management to effectively
meet our mission needs, while keeping pace with
evolving technologies and threats. Strengthened
engagement between our IT organization and our
customers will lead to a shared understanding of
IT needs, and evaluation of customer satisfaction
will determine if those needs were met. NASA will
focus on consistent IT service delivery, reliable
operations, expanded digital capabilities, and pro-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
51
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
Strategic Objective 4.3
Build the next generation of explorers.
Engage students to build a diverse future STEM workforce.
Lead Office
growth in mathematics and remain ranked in the
Office of Science, Technology, Engineering, and
middle of advanced economies on international
Mathematics (STEM) Engagement (OSTEM)
science and mathematics assessments.
Objective Overview
NASA will implement strategies to broaden stu-
NASA makes vital investments toward building a
dent participation to increase diversity, equity,
diverse STEM workforce. The scope of our STEM
inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) in STEM through
engagement comprises all endeavors to attract,
NASA opportunities and activities. While the num-
engage, and educate students and to support ed-
ber of women and underrepresented minorities
ucators and educational institutions.
earning STEM degrees has grown in broad science
and engineering occupations over the last decade,
Given the Nation's need for a skilled STEM work-
significant underrepresentation remains in areas
force and projected demand, NASA clearly has a
critical to NASA like engineering and computer
vested interest in attracting, engaging, and pre-
and mathematical sciences. 2NASA is committed
paring its future STEM professionals. The national
to building a diverse, skilled future STEM work-
STEM ecosystem will benefit from NASA contribu-
force-our next generation of explorers with the
tions to attract and retain students on STEM path-
technical skills needed to carry forward our Na-
ways, with increased attention on underserved
tion's vital mission and work in aeronautics and
and underrepresented students. Recent national
space into the future.
and international tests show that in the last de-
cade, U.S. students have demonstrated little or no
1
Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2020. Science and Engineering Indicators 2020: The State of U.S Science and Engi-
neering. NSB-2020-1. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20201
2 National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2019. Women, Minorities, and Persons with
Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 2019. Special Report NSF 19-304.
Below: Student Launch provides a research-based, competitive experiential exploration opportunity for university, middle and high school student teams
across the nation. One of NASA's Artemis Student Challenges aimed to engage students in NASA's work in science and exploration, Student Launch chal-
lenges student teams to design, build and fly a high-powered rocket containing a science or engineering payload. Image Credit: NASA
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
Objective Strategy
NASA is committed to engaging students in its mis-
sion, with the aim to immerse students in NASA's
work and inspire the next generation to explore. To
that end, NASA will continue to make vital contri-
butions in STEM engagement. NASA's work in STEM
Engagement is a collaborative endeavor which en-
compasses efforts across the OSTEM, the Mission
Directorates, and the Field Centers.
We will sustain our track record of inspiring, attract-
ing, and engaging students through a strategy that
will support Federal STEM education priorities and
drive Agency efforts to:
Attract diverse groups of students to STEM
through learning opportunities that spark
interest and provide connections to NASA's
mission and work;
Hawaii Space Flight Laboratory undergraduate students, summer interns
Create unique opportunities for a diverse set
and engineers integrating the Neutron-1 3-U CubeSat in a cleanroom.
of students to contribute to NASA's work in
NASA Space Grant, MUREP, and EPSCoR will continue to fund a wide
spectrum of competitive student and institutional research opportunities
exploration and discovery; and
to enable contributions to NASA's work in science and exploration. Image
Build a diverse future STEM workforce by
Credit: University of Hawaii at Manoa
engaging students in authentic learning
experiences with NASA's people, content,
and facilities
Moving ahead, NASA will drive progress to expand
This strategy is also centered on five design prin-
student work experiences, anchored to the Agen-
ciples to guide the planning and execution of the
cy's missions and programmatic work with mentors
Agency's efforts: (1) developing and deploying mis-
from the technical workforce. This includes en-
sion-driven authentic STEM experiences, (2) using
hancing the internships program, with objectives to
evidence-based practices, (3) driving scalability, (4)
broaden and enrich student participation.
measuring outcomes, and (5) focusing on DEIA.
In addition to a broad portfolio of efforts dedicat-
NASA will implement STEM engagement initiatives,
ed to students, NASA will support educators and
programs, and activities that serve students, and
educational institutions. This includes providing
provide unique support to educators and edu-
mission-unique content, resources, and support
cational institutions. NASA's STEM engagement
to educators; contributing to classroom and out-
efforts are ultimately focused on attracting, retain-
of-school learning experiences; building capacity
ing, and supporting students on STEM pathways.
at minority-serving institutions (MSIs) and within
Recognizing that attracting students to STEM is the
jurisdictions that have not participated equitably
foundation of a successful model to build a diverse
in competitive aerospace and aerospace-related
future STEM workforce, we will place a focus on evi-
research activities; creating informal educational
dence-based opportunities that attract students, le-
opportunities for learning and programs; and en-
veraging our unique and exciting mission and work.
abling mission-driven research for students and
We will provide mission-driven student opportu-
institutions.
nities and activities along the continuum of STEM
pathways; immersive, experiential learning expe-
NASA will continue to magnify reach and impact
riences that lead to STEM academic pursuits; and
through strategic partnerships. To facilitate inten-
extra-curricular and work experiences that support
tional design of opportunities that meet needs and
higher education students in preparation for suc-
to scale distribution, we will leverage networks and
cessful workforce entry. The scope of student op-
build connections within the national STEM educa-
portunities includes challenges and competitions,
tion ecosystem. We will also develop educational
NASA-unique learning opportunities, educational
tools and platforms to significantly enhance the
products, and work experiences including intern-
digital footprint to better reach students and edu-
ships and fellowships.
cators.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
53
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
NASA is placing an intense focus on broadening
Directorates create opportunities for students to
student participation, with concerted efforts toward
actively engage in NASA's work. These include mis-
engaging more underserved and underrepresented
sion-driven learning opportunities, challenges and
students in NASA STEM engagement programs and
competitions, work experiences, and competitive
activities. To accomplish this, NASA will:
student research opportunities.
Enhance communications and stakeholder
NASA will continue to make strategic investments in
engagement to build networks and
STEM engagement. NASA implements Space Grant,
relationships;
a national network of colleges and universities with
Strengthen practices and systems;
over 1,000 affiliate institutions and organizations
Build a solid foundation for a focus on
working to expand opportunities for students to
metrics and evaluation to effectively
participate in NASA's aeronautics and space proj-
measure progress, and;
ects. Space Grant is made up of 52 consortia lo-
Create a culture and drive a collective focus
cated in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and
across NASA's STEM engagement community
Puerto Rico. Moving forward, Space Grant will con-
on broadening student participation, and
tinue to provide valuable learning experiences for
foster a commitment to DEIA in student
undergraduate and graduate students and build
opportunities and programs.
delivery of experiential opportunities for middle
and high school students.
NASA is committed to an evidence-driven model
and will continue to engage in evidence-building ac-
NASA EPSCoR establishes partnerships with Gov-
tivities specifically focused on underserved and un-
ernment, higher education, and industry that are
derrepresented students and communities using a
designed to drive sustainable improvements in re-
comprehensive performance assessment and eval-
search and development capacity and competitive-
uation framework. The framework includes a learn-
ness in eligible jurisdictions.
ing agenda and an evidence-based decision-making
process that engages both internal and external
MUREP provides support via competitive oppor-
stakeholder audiences.
tunities and awards to MSIs. MUREP investments
enhance the research, academic, and technology
NASA is well positioned within the Nation's STEM
capabilities of MSIs through multiyear cooperative
ecosystem to collaborate with other Federal agen-
agreements, bolstering their capacity in educating
cies, state and local Government, industry, insti-
and preparing students for STEM careers. MUREP
tutions, and the non-profit sector to contribute to
will continue to expand competitive opportunities
a shared goal of a globally competitive workforce.
to address specific gaps needs while building ca-
Our unique contributions are vital to attract and
pacity at institutions.
build a vibrant and diverse next generation STEM
workforce that will continue the Nation's legacy of
Next Gen STEM develops and deploys evi-
exploration and discovery. To execute our STEM
dence-based STEM learning opportunities that pro-
engagement efforts, we will leverage our communi-
vide a platform for students to learn via NASA's en-
ty of talented and dedicated education profession-
deavors in exploration and discovery. Through Next
als and its technical workforce, who together can
Gen STEM, NASA makes vital investments in K-12
inspire and engage youth and students in STEM.
and informal education. This includes competitive
awards to the Museum and Informal Education
NASA conducts STEM engagement efforts through
Alliance, comprised of more than 2,000 member
a diverse portfolio of opportunities, activities,
organizations, including museums, science cen-
products, and resources for students, educators,
ters, parks, libraries, planetariums, nature centers,
and educational institutions. OSTEM is responsible
and after-school groups. Looking ahead, Next Gen
for the strategic direction, operational integration,
STEM will strengthen efforts to engage K-12 stu-
and assessment and evaluation of STEM engage-
dents, build networks within the formal education
ment. OSTEM implements the STEM Engagement
ecosystem, engage educators through the NASA
Program, consisting of four projects: the National
CONNECT community of practice, train NASA STEM
Space Grant College and Fellowship Project (Space
experts to expand work with students, and expand
Grant); Minority University Research and Education
challenges and competitions to broaden student
Project (MUREP); Established Program to Stimulate
participation.
Competitive Research (EPSCoR); and Next Genera-
tion STEM project (Next Gen STEM). NASA Mission
NASA will continue to build collaborative efforts
and facilitate connections to better serve stu-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
54
Strategic Goal 4
ADVANCE
dents and educators. The Mission Directorates
themes and STEM engagement efforts;
will continue to create mission-centered learning
Foster innovative models, methods, or
opportunities and drive student contributions to
approaches tied to national and Agency
NASA's work. The Aeronautics Research Mission
STEM education goals; and
Directorate in collaboration with MUREP, will offer
Broaden participation of students from
unique research opportunities in critical challenges
groups traditionally underrepresented in
facing aviation, while efforts with Space Grant will
STEM.
increase award opportunities to university stu-
dents proposing entrepreneurial solutions to make
We conduct strategic partnerships with a wide
aviation more sustainable. Partnership efforts
range of external STEM engagement stakeholder
between the Earth Sciences Division and MUREP
organizations through formal Space Act Agree-
will foster MSI contributions and build capacity in
ments. Generally, these provide unfunded col-
climate change research. NASA will cultivate broad-
laborators with access to NASA mission data and
ened participation from underserved communities
imagery, subject matter expertise in scientific and
through connections between existing networks
technical disciplines connected to our Mission, and
to programs such as Science Mission Directorate's
support with curation of NASA education resources,
Science Activation, which supports a cooperative
products, and materials. Through these efforts, we
network of competitively selected teams that work
coordinate with industry, educational institutions,
together to connect NASA science experts, unique
and non-profit organizations to support develop-
content, and authentic experiences with diverse
ment of high-quality opportunities for both youth
communities across the Nation. In addition, efforts
outside of the classroom and students in pre-kin-
to build connections between the Global Learn-
dergarten through graduate school.
ing and Observations to Benefit the Environment
Program and NASA STEM engagement networks
NASA also works in partnership with other Federal
will broaden student contributions to understand-
agencies to coordinate efforts and to collaborate
ing the Earth system and climate change. Finally,
on specific initiatives. For example, NASA works
OSTEM and the Mission Directorates will expand
with the U.S. Department of Education to provide
collaborations to enable student contributions to
students with access to scientific and technical
NASA's missions, building upon Artemis Student
mentors and equip educators with STEM resources
Challenges, the Breakthrough, Innovative and
that can be used both inside and outside of the
Game-Changing Idea Challenge, and the University
classroom. We also collaborate with the National
Student Research Challenge.
Science Foundation to advance diversity and in-
clusion goals through coordination of fellowship
NASA's STEM workforce demonstrates a unique lev-
programming and undergraduate student engage-
el of dedication to building the next generation of
ments.
explorers. In addition to OSTEM, NASA Mission Di-
rectorates and their programs, as well as the STEM
Contributing Programs and/or Program
disciplinary organizations, provide exciting student
Activities
opportunities and access to NASA's STEM profes-
STEM Engagement Program (NASA Space Grant;
sionals and their expertise.
EPSCoR; MUREP; Next Gen STEM); Mission Enabling
NASA's compelling and exciting STEM engagement
Services (Center STEM Engagement).
opportunities and efforts will inspire students to
reach for the stars and build our Nation's next gen-
eration of explorers.
How NASA Engages and Works with
Partners
NASA has a rich history of collaborating across the
Nation's STEM ecosystem to foster innovative stu-
dent learning experiences that leverage our unique
mission, people, and facilities. NASA collaborates
with partners to:
Engage students across the United States
in opportunities connected to our missions,
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
55
FIELD CENTERS AND FEDERALLY FUND-
ED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
CENTER STRATEGIC GOAL CONTRIBU-
TIONS
Armstrong Flight Research Center (AFRC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
AFRC provides specialized aircraft and capabilities to observe Earth's physical processes, test new observ-
ing technologies, and calibrate and validate Earth-observing satellites worldwide. AFRC enables improved
understanding of our planet and ensures the success of the Science Mission Directorate's (SMD's) Earth Sci-
ence research-particularly for its Airborne Science Program.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
AFRC tailors its risk-based integration, test, airworthiness, and flight safety processes to developmental
space exploration projects for NASA in partnership with other Government agencies and industry. Using this
process to assess, accept, and communicate the residual risk associated with atmospheric flight research,
AFRC is participating in an assessment of suborbital flight providers for the Commercial Crew program.
AFRC is also working on landing support of the CST-100 Starliner. AFRC participated in the Human Landing
System (HLS) commercial source selection and supports the NASA Crew Office evaluation of HLS training
requirements.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
AFRC hosts the program management office for Flight Opportunities, which supports commercial space-
flight industry maturation and validation of capabilities needed for NASA missions and commercial appli-
cations. The program awards flights and agreements to researchers from industry, academia, non-profit
research institutes, and Government organizations. These investments advance technologies of interest to
NASA, support commercial flight providers, and expand space-based applications and commerce.
AFRC also participates in NASA's Center Innovation Fund, which support emerging technologies and creative
initiatives, led by NASA scientists and engineers, but often in partnership with other Centers, other agencies,
research laboratories, academia, and private industry.
AFRC is a leader in atmospheric flight research, bringing decades of experience, complex systems integra-
tion expertise, unique infrastructure, flight test techniques, and flight test systems to support the demands
of a various aeronautics initiatives that leverage flight to perform basic research and validate the results of
analysis and ground-based testing.
AFRC enables efficient and sustainable aviation by developing electric aircraft, informing certification stan-
dards for advanced air mobility systems, participating in the development and flight tests of the world's first
quiet supersonic aircraft to enable a new aviation market, and a new commercial subsonic configuration
that will reduce the environmental impact of aviation.
AFRC's unique Dryden Aeronautical Test Range supports diverse missions with comprehensive resources for
the control and monitoring of flight activities, including a flight test data portal to ensure retention and avail-
ability of critical data.
The Center's world-class airworthiness and flight safety review process enables NASA and partners to con-
duct high-risk flight activities safely and effectively across subsonic, supersonic, and hypersonic speed re-
gimes.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
56
Additionally, the AFRC Technology Transfer Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and
space are made more broadly available to the public-boosting the U.S. economy and maximizing return on
the Nation's investment in NASA.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
AFRC analyzes potential future Mission Directorate, program, and mission requirements and optimizes
Agency capabilities through rigorous flight safety processes. The Center continues to expand recruitment
and workforce strategies to reach diverse candidates and build a workforce representative of all segments
of society. AFRC's Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer, in collaboration with the Office of Diversity and
Equal Opportunity, Office of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) Engagement, and employee
resource groups, develops and promotes training, academic programs, and rewards and recognition ap-
proaches that enhance the employee experience, while also building and retaining capabilities for mission
success.
AFRC works with the Mission Support Directorate (MSD) to maintain the operating environment, support the
locally assigned MSD workforce, and transform mission support operations by leveraging the skills and ca-
pacity of the enterprise workforce.
AFRC's work in STEM engagement is focused on serving students. NASA invests in STEM engagement for stu-
dents of all levels. AFRC will leverage its community of talented and dedicated education professionals and
its technical workforce to inspire and engage youth and build the next generation of explorers.
Ames Research Center (ARC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
ARC conducts research and technology development in aeronautics, astrobiology, astrophysics, and plan-
etary, biological, and Earth sciences. ARC hosts the NASA's Mars Climate Modeling Center, the NASA Earth
Exchange, the Center for Life Detection, and the Space Biosciences Collaborative. ARC also leads a combined
aeronautics and science activity focusing on research, detection, prediction, and mitigation of wildfires.
ARC's core expertise in autonomy and robotics plays an integral role in the exploration of planetary bodies.
ARC leads the development of the Volatiles Investigating Polar Exploration Rover, which will prospect for
resources in the lunar South Pole region. ARC develops and tests vertical lift aircraft concepts, such as the
Mars helicopter carried on the Mars 2020 Perseverance Rover mission, for operation in different planetary
atmospheres.
ARC also manages the Small Spacecraft Technology Program and the Earth Science Project Office for air-
borne science investigations.
ARC develops, builds, and flies space missions and payloads to study the effects of the space environment
on biological systems. The Center has further expertise in infrared, ultraviolet, and visible imaging, neutron
spectrometers, X-ray diffraction and fluorescence instruments, biofluidic systems, exoplanet imaging tech-
nologies, airborne Earth science instruments, and environmental life support systems.
ARC hosts the Agency's advanced supercomputing capability and systems, including leading disruptive tech-
nologies and data mining systems, with many scientific applications. ARC enables planetary scientific discov-
ery through its aerothermodynamics, thermal protection materials, and arc jet testing capabilities.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
ARC's work in life, lunar, and planetary sciences, entry systems technologies, and robotic prospecting mis-
sions is crucial to NASA's effort to send humans back to the Moon and on towards Mars. ARC incorporates
microbiological science with spaceflight engineering for SmallSats and other missions to the International
Space Station (ISS) and beyond. ARC supports life away from Earth and develops technologies to sustain as-
tronauts on long-duration space travel and presence on the Moon or Mars. ARC hosts NASA's Solar System
Exploration Research Virtual Institute, which engages the scientific community in studying the Moon and
other potential destinations.
ARC operates the NASA Arc Jet Complex, the largest and primary facility to test heatshield materials and
spacecraft structures in hypervelocity flight conditions, supporting the safety of astronauts in flight. ARC
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
57
operates the world's largest human-in-the loop motion simulator, the Vertical Motion Simulator, to evaluate
handling quality and development of human landing systems.
ARC leads Data Systems Integration for Artemis and delivers mission planning systems for current and
next-generation Mars surface missions. ARC provides testbeds for developing and validating robotics soft-
ware that enables increasingly autonomous capabilities for crew support and uncrewed station-keeping and
maintenance. ARC fault detection and recovery technologies should help improve the safety of the Space
Launch System and Orion.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
ARC hosts the program management offices for both Small Spacecraft Technology (SST) and Small Business
Innovative Research & Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR). SST develops and demonstrates
new small spacecraft technologies and capabilities for NASA's missions in science, exploration, and space
operations. SBIR/STTR funds the research, development, and demonstration of innovative technologies that
fulfill NASA needs and have significant potential for successful commercialization.
In addition, ARC supports space technology maturation projects within NASA's Game Changing Develop-
ment (GCD); participates in the Center Innovation Fund (CIF), supporting emerging technologies and creative
initiatives, led by NASA scientists and engineers; and hosts the ARC Technology Transfer Office, ensuring
that innovations developed for aeronautics and space are broadly available to the public.
ARC's 30 years of experience in advanced air traffic management systems improves the efficiency and safety
of commercial aviation, reducing delays, fuel burn, and greenhouse gas emissions. ARC leverages expertise
in system-wide safety, autonomy, artificial intelligence, and transforms the National Airspace Systems to ac-
commodate all vehicle types and complex operations from low altitude to upper atmosphere flight regimes.
ARC develops airspace tools to support aerial wildfire suppression.
The Center also conducts research and development of large-scale simulations for sustained atmospheric
flight, including aerodynamic performance prediction, vehicle design and shape optimization, noise predic-
tion, fluid-structure interaction, propulsion-airframe integration, and safety analysis. Though the Sustainable
Flight National Partnership, ARC serves in a critical vertical flight research role for Advanced Air Mobility sys-
tems analysis and testing capabilities.
ARC operates the Transonic Wind Tunnels, used for evaluating new aircraft configurations for commercial
and military applications as well as the launch abort systems for the Artemis program, and the Unitary Plan
Wind Tunnel. Additionally, ARC operates the Vertical Motion Simulator, Air Traffic Control Laboratory, Air-
space Operation Laboratory, and Future Flight Central to provide realistic environments for air traffic and
airspace management research and to study human systems performance, human and machine interac-
tions, and future aviation safety challenges.
ARC hosts the NASA Aeronautics Research Institute (NARI) that was established by NASA ARMD in 2012 to
promote innovation in aeronautics to address challenges in the Nation's air transportation system, facilitate
partnerships with the Federal Aviation Administration, other agencies, academia, and the commercial and
emerging aviation industry, and inspire cross-Center activities. NARI advances the future of aeronautics by
listening to stakeholders and recommending opportunities for game-changing technologies.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
ARC manages and operates several unique research and testing facilities, including the Arc Jet Complex for
simulating hypervelocity flight conditions and the NASA Advanced Supercomputing Facility, which hosts sev-
eral eco-friendly, multi-petaflop supercomputers to meet NASA's high-performance computing needs.
ARC serves as the nerve Center for securing NASA's information technology infrastructure. It co-hosts the
NASA Security Operations Center with Johnson Space Center to protect more than 100,000 devices and us-
ers.
ARC provides support and resources to educators and institutions to effectively engage students. ARC lever-
ages its community of talented and dedicated education professionals and its technical workforce to inspire
and engage students in STEM and build the next generation of explorers.
ARC strives to ensure mission success by enabling a positive environment that values diversity, equity, inclu-
sion, and accessibility. ARC aims to attract, fully utilize, and retain the best talent to achieve its mission.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
58
ARC must be viewed as an employer of choice with a diverse workforce.
ARC hosts the NASA Research Park, which includes tenants from other Government agencies, academia, and
innovative private-sector entities, enabling a research and development ecosystem and partnership for cur-
rent and future NASA missions.
Glenn Research Center (GRC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
GRC's contributions to power and propulsion systems, materials and structures, and space environment
research ensure that NASA maximizes the scientific knowledge gained from robotic missions and advances
new capabilities for future exploration.
GRC provides radioisotope power and electric propulsion systems, including the development of a next-gen-
eration radioisotope thermal generator, to ensure the success of current and future robotic planetary sci-
ence missions. The Center's expertise in materials and structures, as well as unique space environment test
facilities, are applied to develop and test electronics, scientific instruments, and other payloads for opera-
tion in the extreme environments of space.
As a global leader in microgravity research, GRC collaborates with academia, other Government agencies,
and industry to drive research in microgravity combustion, fluid physics, and soft matter dynamics. This re-
search spans new concepts, testing in unique environmental test facilities, and conducting experiments on
the ISS.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and on towards Mars for Sustainable Long-term
Exploration, Development, and Utilization.
GRC leads the development of electric propulsion and power systems technology for exploration of the
Moon and on towards Mars, including the Power and Propulsion Element, a key component of the Gateway,
which will serve as a multi-purpose outpost for Lunar exploration. GRC is also leading the integration of the
European Service Module, the primary power and propulsion component for the Orion crew vehicle, to en-
sure the success of Artemis missions.
GRC is also developing technologies that will enable sustained exploration of the Lunar surface, human mis-
sions to Mars, and other deep space destinations. Space nuclear power is one essential capability, including
nuclear electric propulsion for in-space transportation, and fission surface power technology for operation
on the surface of the Moon and Mars.
The Center is also leading NASA efforts to evaluate and integrate commercially provided satellite communi-
cations capabilities for future missions in low Earth orbit and beyond.
To support the growing commercial space economy, GRC collaborates with industry, academia, and other
Government agencies to commercialize NASA technology and form public-private partnerships for mutual
benefit. Unique, full-scale space environment test facilities at Lewis Field and Armstrong Test Facility are
supporting both Government and commercial systems development.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
GRC conducts research and technology development for aerospace power, propulsion, and communications
technologies from the conceptual stage through flight demonstration in collaboration with industry, aca-
demia, and other partners.
GRC is developing in-situ resource utilization concepts and technologies that will enable the use of natural
resources in space for sustainable human exploration. GRC leads the demonstration of cryogenic fluid man-
agement technologies that will enable future deep space exploration architectures.
With an emphasis on these technology areas, GRC supports maturation projects within NASA's GCD. In
addition, GRC leads the Solar Electric Propulsion Project and the Fission Surface Power Project for NASA's
Technology Demonstration Missions (TDM). GRC also participates in NASA's CIF, which supports emerging
technologies and creative initiatives led by NASA scientists and engineers.
GRC collaborates with industry to address the challenges of next-generation commercial aviation, including
the next single-aisle aircraft and emerging Advanced Air Mobility markets. This work includes hybrid-electric
power and propulsion systems, components, and technologies, to meet sustainable aviation goals and de-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
59
velop electrified propulsion systems. GRC provides expertise and capabilities to demonstrate these technol-
ogies through extensive ground testing and flight demonstrations.
GRC leads research and technology development for advanced airbreathing propulsion systems of super-
sonic and hypersonic aircraft. The Center is also developing communications technologies to integrate fu-
ture advanced vehicles into the airspace to transform the aviation industry.
GRC continues its long history of delivering innovative technologies and concepts to enable a pathway to-
wards zero-emission aircraft, including materials and structures, sustainable fuels, advanced manufacturing,
and power generation and storage.
Additionally, the GRC Technology Transfer Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and
space are made more broadly available to the public.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
GRC develops and sustains integrated unique capabilities (expertise, laboratories, test facilities, and digital
platforms) in propulsion, power, communications, materials and structures, cryogenic fluids, physical and
biological sciences to support current and future science missions, human exploration space technology
development, and aeronautics research. These capabilities support a broad portfolio of work including ear-
ly-stage research, technology development, demonstrations, and aerospace flight system development. The
GRC capabilities will increasingly integrate and leverage new digital capabilities and platforms to transform
the way that NASA designs, develops, tests, and evaluates new technologies and flight systems.
GRC takes action to attract, develop, and retain a diverse workforce that reflects societal demographics and
emphasizes equity, inclusion, and accessibility. The Center will continue to evolve with increased workforce
flexibility and agility, including enhanced capabilities to work across different office, laboratory, and remote
work environments to meet current and future NASA mission needs.
GRC leverages NASA mission support capabilities to ensure integration of efficient operations, communica-
tions, financial management, procurement, infrastructure management, legal services, occupational safety
and health programs, information technology, and other services to deliver on current and future commit-
ments.
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
GSFC enables and conducts science research from space. The Center's measurements, modeling, and theo-
retical investigations in the areas of Earth science, planetary and lunar science, heliophysics, and astrophys-
ics expand knowledge, national capability, and opportunities for collaboration on a variety of flight missions
and field campaigns. GSFC teams work with other NASA Centers, academia, and industry to conceptualize,
design, build, test, integrate, and operate space-based, airborne, and ground-based missions, spacecraft,
and state-of-the-art instruments.
The Center's renowned, in-house space and Earth scientists work closely with the engineers, project manag-
ers, and safety and mission assurance professionals to develop and refine scientific requirements for mis-
sions; provide operations for those missions; and collect and disseminate mission data to partners and the
public. Using data from Center-led and partner missions, GSFC creates and hosts authoritative models of
Earth and space phenomena used by scientists worldwide for analysis and advancement of the understand-
ing of Earth and space science phenomena, including climate, weather, space weather, and star and galaxy
formation.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
GSFC supports NASA's goal of extending humanity's presence in space in several ways. The GSFC-managed
Space and Near-Earth Networks provide space communications for all human spaceflight programs as well
as other Agency programs. The Center's launch range, vehicle processing, and payload processing capa-
bilities at Wallops Flight Facility resupplies the ISS with experiments and life support. GSFC also develops
technology that improves crew safety today and enables the exploration concepts of tomorrow, such as
advanced robotic and in-space assembly systems. The Center enhances exploration by identifying and guid-
ing scientifically significant research activities, training explorers in scientific techniques, developing models
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
60
of observed phenomena, and conducting research that characterizes the exploration locales, identifying
threats to explorers and their support systems.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
GSFC's science and innovation enable economic growth on a national scale, and GSFC's missions drive tech-
nologies that affect people every day. The Center's climate models inform senior Government and industry
policy makers. Worldwide weather reports are possible because of GSFC satellites and weather models.
GSFC's search and rescue technology saves lives on Earth while GSFC's space weather detection models
help protect astronauts and satellites in orbit and communications and power infrastructure on the ground.
Further, GSFC transfers innovations to industry for commercial applications such as advanced laser and
X-ray systems for communications, medical imaging systems, and robotics for safer mining and drilling. The
Center's cryogenic systems, component miniaturization, new sensors and instruments, and robotics systems
are influencing the next generation of consumer and industrial systems and creating new capabilities for the
space industry.
GSFC developed the Laser Communications Relay Demonstration, for NASA's TDM, which successfully
launched in December 2021. GSFC also supports maturation projects within NASA's GCD. In addition, GSFC
participates in NASA's CIF, which supports emerging technologies and creative initiatives led by NASA scien-
tists and engineers.
Additionally, the GSFC Technology Transfer Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and
space are made more broadly available to the public.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
GSFC relies on, recognizes, and nourishes the diversity of its workforce, and commits to diversity, equity,
inclusion, and accessibility throughout the organization and among its suppliers and partners. Physical and
digital accessibility is integrated into missions, products, and the Center's infrastructure plans.
The GSFC-managed Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V) facility in West Virginia provides software
assurance services Agency-wide. The Center manages electrical, electronic, and electromechanical parts ser-
vices for NASA.
Students apply each year for internships and other work opportunities at the Center, and GSFC involves uni-
versity faculty, students, and researchers as principal partners in all phases of its work. GSFC's STEM learn-
ing activities, internships, fellowships, and post-doctoral opportunities are used to translate core missions
into experiences that motivate and inspire students and educators at all levels.
GSFC consistently reaches across Federal agency, commercial, and academic boundaries to execute NA-
SA's Mission, creating innovative partnership arrangements for nearly every project. As a result, the Center
manages one of the Agency's largest portfolios of cooperative and reimbursable agreements with industry,
academia, other Government agencies, and international partners. These include relationships with the U.S.
Space Force and longstanding agreements to provide weather and terrestrial observing satellites to the Na-
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA) and the U.S. Geological Survey.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
Scientific discovery is a driving force for humankind. JPL develops and operates robotic missions that con-
tribute to the scope of human knowledge and improve the human condition. JPL enhances technology, cre-
ates new industries, and fosters peaceful connections with other nations. JPL continues to create opportuni-
ties and missions that contribute to the expansion of scientific knowledge.
Earth science missions, built by JPL for NASA, reveal the dynamic interactions between natural and hu-
man components to manage Earth's changing climate. JPL supports implementation of the Earth Science
Observatory. JPL collaborates with Federal, state, and commercial organizations to convert datasets into
applications to care for our planet. JPL plans to increase access and use of datasets by embracing data tech-
nologies, including artificial intelligence, to better enable data-driven science with an increasing emphasis on
climate change.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
61
Beyond Earth, NASA's Perseverance rover caches samples from Mars as the first step of a future Mars Sam-
ple Return mission. Europa Clipper will begin a new era of exploration through NASA's Ocean Worlds pro-
gram, while the VERITAS mission (which stands for Venus Emissivity, Radio Science, InSAR [Interferometric
Synthetic Aperture Radar], Topography, and Spectroscopy) (VERITAS) mission will unveil Venus to pinpoint
future missions to our sister planet. JPL is building the coronagraph technology demonstration for the Ro-
man Space Telescope, which will image nearby exoplanets that are a billion times fainter than their stars.
Public access to JPL's mission data begins by providing seamless transfer from spacecraft with NASA's Deep
Space Network through NASA's Advanced Multi-Mission Operations System to NASA's Planetary Data Sys-
tem. JPL also operates multiple mission and science archives to make data accessible and enable new dis-
coveries by researchers.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
JPL advances technologies for communications, navigation, and surface operations at and around the Moon
designed to ensure robust operations in cislunar space. To prepare for future landed exploration, Lunar
Trailblazer will investigate water on the Moon and characterize resources. In addition, the Farside Seismic
Suite, which will receive a ride to the lunar surface as part of the Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS)
initiative, will reveal the interior structure of the Moon and demonstrate the capability to survive the night
for long-term operations.
JPL also develops capabilities for advanced commercial deep space communication and navigation. JPL
works directly with a range of startup and innovative small businesses to guide their development, supply-
ing direction and objectives for NASA needs. These businesses will be well positioned to contribute to the
emerging space economy as suppliers of unique, innovative, and cost-effective products that serve NASA
and the broader community.
JPL enables enhanced access to space by providing and developing advanced navigation, communication,
and security capabilities to ensure that crewed spacecraft, and their robotic precursors, can reach their ex-
ploration targets and robustly communicate with Earth.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
To advance future NASA missions, JPL will address challenges across a range of technology fields, including
communications, autonomy, artificial intelligence, machine learning, robotics, data science, nanotechnology,
quantum sensing, and advanced manufacturing, design, and materials. Leveraging these technologies in
space vehicle systems will enable transformational missions, whether they are small spacecraft or complex
landing, in-situ systems, and sample return.
JPL advances cutting edge technologies that support national needs in climate, quantum information sys-
tems, commercial space, transportation, and cybersecurity. JPL will execute technology demonstrations of
capabilities that enable new discoveries and exploration. These include flying an optical communications
system that increases the data volume from deep space missions, an atomic clock that enables robotic
spacecraft to operate without near-continuous connection to Earth, landing systems that enable pinpoint
landings on extreme terrain, and a coronagraph instrument that will pave the way toward finding life out-
side of our solar system.
With an emphasis on these technology areas, JPL supports maturation and demonstration projects through
NASA's GCD and Technology Demonstration Missions, respectively. JPL also participates in NASA's CIF,
which supports emerging technologies and creative initiatives led by NASA scientists and engineers.
JPL collaborates with other Government agencies and private-sector partners to address problems of na-
tional significance and catalyze economic growth. JPL also develops and transfers technologies that enable
reliable high-speed communication, data transfer, processing, visualization, access, and encryption capabili-
ties within the national sphere of influence around Earth and out to the Moon. The JPL Technology Transfer
Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and space are made more broadly available to
the public.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
JPL maintains a diverse talent pipeline that attracts and engages the brightest minds across the STEM com-
munity. To further diversify this pipeline and increase retention and promotion rates among underrepre-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
62
sented groups, JPL is focusing on increasing engagement with Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
fostering career opportunities for underrepresented groups, and launching an accessibility taskforce. JPL
strives to create an environment where employees feel included, represented, and valued while providing
flexibility around where, when, and how they work best.
JPL transforms the enterprise to better support flight projects by thinking about the enterprise as a system
comprised of people, processes, tools, data, facilities, and other resources that work together to accomplish
NASA's Mission. JPL and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center are innovating in mission and science
operations to match future concepts and smaller missions enabled by easier access to space. JPL is also pur-
suing and infusing advanced capabilities in communication, navigation, and mission operations to enable
the next generation of robotic missions.
JPL develops future principal investigators through various experiential workshops that increase partici-
pants' capabilities to ideate, collaborate, and communicate compelling science-driven missions. To bring
space down to Earth for all, JPL is also leading engagement activities and will continue making connections
with the public through engaging learning activities to inspire the next generation of explorers.
Johnson Space Center (JSC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
JSC manages the ISS, which provides long-duration microgravity for continuous and interactive research
while revolutionizing technologies and capabilities that will reveal the universe. The ISS is a unique platform
for scientists and researchers to monitor climate change, map natural resources, predict and assess natural
disasters, monitor urban growth, and support agriculture and wildlife management.
JSC curates all extraterrestrial sample collections, ensuring astromaterials sample integrity and planetary
protection. The Center applies orbital debris modeling and risk analysis for human spacecraft systems and
robotic satellites. JSC leads NASA's initiative to deliver science and technology to the lunar surface through
CLPS, where companies of varying sizes bid on delivering payloads for NASA including integration and oper-
ations, launching from Earth and landing on the surface of the Moon.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
JSC leads mission design, development, and execution for crewed exploration missions, sending humans
into the solar system faster and farther. The ISS provides innovative ways to fly and test hardware that will
be required for deep space exploration, including advanced environmental control and life support systems
that will be tested using streamlined processes for flight hardware development. JSC's advanced technology
experiments on the ISS, such as the sensing of hurricanes, advanced medical diagnostic techniques, and
pharmaceutical investigations, improve life on Earth. JSC expands partnerships with entities outside the
aerospace sector to increase space flight expertise and innovation capabilities.
Orion is equipped with advanced technologies and backup capabilities to ensure its mission performance is
safe, reliable, and successful. JSC leads development of Gateway, a crew-tended spaceport in lunar orbit that
will serve as a multipurpose outpost orbiting the Moon and a staging area for deep space exploration.
JSC is standing up the extravehicular activities (EVA) and Human Surface Mobility Program that includes ISS
EVA support, exploration EVA development, and the Lunar Terrain Vehicle. The Center also maintains archi-
tecture and mission planning capabilities.
JSC is the home to the Human Research Program, which develops advanced life science capabilities to pro-
tect the health, safety, and performance of astronauts as well as provide benefits to medical science on
Earth. JSC expands frontiers by leading development of future deep space missions on Orion. This crew ve-
hicle will support deep space missions to the Moon and eventually towards Mars.
White Sands Test Facility, managed by JSC, serves as a preeminent resource for testing and evaluating haz-
ardous materials and rocket propulsion systems. JSC continues to explore space to benefit humanity and
maintains a focus on solving challenges that both advance human productivity in space and unite the Center
with partners from other agencies, industry, and academia to complete bold missions.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
63
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
Programs such as ISS, Orion, Gateway, Human Research Program, Commercial Low Earth Orbit (COMM-
LEO), Commercial Lunar Payload Services, Extravehicular Activities and Human Surface Mobility, along with
the Center's support of Commercial Crew and Human Landing System activities, provide billions of dollars of
development activity across the country. NASA is working with both commercial and international partners
to establish the Gateway as a cislunar outpost for human explorers. JSC incorporates new technologies and
available commercial solutions to develop alternative components and broaden the supplier base. Addition-
ally, the COMM-LEO program, which supports Strategic Goal 2, strengthens the high-tech industrial base
and supports further development of a commercial marketplace in low Earth orbit through commercial and
academic partnerships and technology transfer.
JSC supports technology maturation projects within NASA's GCD. JSC also participates in NASA's CIF, which
supports emerging technologies and creative initiatives led by NASA scientists and engineers. Additionally,
the JSC Technology Transfer Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and space are made
more broadly available to the public.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
JSC collaborates with the Commercial Crew Program on development and certification process for getting
U.S. astronauts to and from the ISS. The ISS program and JSC's Flight Operations Directorate are reducing
operational costs and developing new capabilities, while increasing science utilization and commercial ac-
cess to low Earth orbit. JSC promotes mission success by delivering reliable, adaptable, and streamlined
technical and professional support infrastructure and capabilities. The Center engages the public in NASA
projects through robust public outreach and social media programs, including opportunities for interaction
with astronauts. JSC also focuses on lowering barriers to collaboration with both existing and emerging part-
ners. The Center does this by developing critical expertise, serving as champions for innovation, and proac-
tively recruiting as well as developing a diverse pool of highly motivated employees that propel the frontiers
of space exploration. JSC actively promotes diversity, equity, inclusion and equal opportunities via our Inclu-
sion and Innovation Council, ten Employee Resource Groups, and the Inclusive Leadership Cadre. Lastly, JSC
is intentional about partnering with academia to promote STEM activities with a broad and diverse commu-
nity of students.
Kennedy Space Center (KSC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
KSC procures commercial launch services for NASA's science and robotic missions, ranging from Venture
Class for the smallest and lightest CubeSat satellites to Heavy Class for the largest and most massive space
telescopes. The Center also leads plant research and production in a microgravity environment and sup-
ports biological sciences for NASA's Biological and Physical Sciences Program.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
KSC provides program and project management support for NASA's exploration missions in several ways.
The Center leads processing, assembly, integration, and test of payload and flight science experiments
bound for the ISS and low Earth orbit. KSC's Commercial Crew Program acquires and manages commercial
transportation services, including development and human certification of integrated commercial crew sys-
tems and flight certification for each crew transportation mission to and from the ISS. KSC's Launch Services
Program acquires and manages commercial launch services, including certification and technical insight and
approval on commercial launch vehicles for NASA's science and robotic small, medium, and large class mis-
sions.
The Center designs, develops, operates, sustains, integrates, and tests flight systems and ground systems,
and support infrastructure, including lander ground operations. KSC's Exploration Ground Systems Program
leads launch processing for the integrated launch vehicle and spacecraft to advance human exploration.
This includes vehicle and spacecraft processing, servicing, maintenance, command, control, and telemetry;
launch, landing and recovery; and crew support. KSC's Deep Space Logistics provides the logistics services
capabilities for NASA's deep space exploration plan supporting the Space Launch System (SLS), HLS, and Ori-
on.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
64
KSC leads partnership development strategies and operations for the Nation's pre-eminent multi-user
spaceport, supporting Government and commercial operations. KSC offers commercial services for ground
operations and services that can accommodate different vehicles, systems, and commercial launch provid-
ers. It operates and maintains a multiuser spaceport with infrastructure, systems, and processes to support
flight and ground hardware for crewed and uncrewed launch vehicles and payloads. KSC enables NASA
mission success and makes the space enterprises of NASA, other Government agencies, and the commercial
sector more capable and affordable.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
KSC supports research, development, testing, and demonstration of advanced flight and surface systems
and transformational technologies to advance exploration systems, human and cargo landers, and deep
space systems. KSC also supports environmental control and life support systems technology development,
habitation space systems development, and operations and in-situ resource utilization.
KSC works with commercial industry to encourage new opportunities and develop partnership agreements
that further commercial investment to enhance the multi-user spaceport, enable innovation, and increase
diverse access to space.
KSC supports technology maturation projects within NASA's GCD Program. KSC also participates in NASA's
CIF, which supports emerging technologies and creative initiatives led by NASA scientists and engineers. Ad-
ditionally, the KSC Technology Transfer Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and space
are made more broadly available to the public.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
KSC collaborates with partners, including other Centers and external entities, to advance and share technol-
ogy, promote STEM learning, and engage with the public regarding NASA's Mission.
KSC safely and strategically optimizes its diverse workforce and provides innovative, cost-effective, and effi-
cient Center services to support the Agency's Mission. KSC continually evaluates and aligns its highly-valued
people and programmatic and institutional capabilities to implement rigorous and innovative safety, facility
and systems engineering and integration, IT, and other services to ensure reliable and quality products.
Langley Research Center (LaRC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
Researchers at LaRC work to understand air quality, radiation and climate, and atmospheric composition.
They also develop active remote sensing techniques to boost the quality of atmospheric data. This research
balances advanced instrument development, field and space-borne experiments, and data retrieval, analy-
sis, and archival.
LaRC houses the world's most comprehensive collection of atmospheric data in its Atmospheric Science
Data Center and provides this data to the global public. Additionally, LaRC hosts the National DEVELOP pro-
gram that addresses environmental and public policy issues through collaborative research projects con-
necting NASA data to regional concerns around the globe.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
LaRC develops concepts and tools to extend human presence in space, particularly innovations needed to
safely live and work on the Moon and Mars. LaRC designs architecture solutions for humans and equipment
to reach the Moon and Mars; leads development of new high-mass entry, descent, and landing (EDL) tech-
nologies to allow precision landing of needed equipment and vehicles; and develops tools and innovations
for the autonomous construction, assembly, deployment, and manufacturing of structures need for long
duration space missions.
LaRC is committed to supporting partners with EDL technologies for Human Landing Systems, such as Nav-
igational Doppler Lidar. Partnering with MSFC and GSFC, LaRC provides assembly expertise for the Agency's
initiatives, which will lead to precision-assembled space structures. After arriving on the Moon, LaRC will
contribute to lunar surface construction efforts with insights on landing pads and advanced berms, vertical
solar arrays, lunar surface manipulator systems, and safe-haven habitats.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
65
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
LaRC research helps the Nation meet fundamental challenges that arise from the rapid evolution of avia-
tion and space exploration. The Center's work fuels economic growth in traditional commercial aviation and
space technologies and emerging markets. LaRC is a major contributor to the Agency's current experimental
flight demonstrators (also known as X-planes), including the X-59 Low Boom Flight Demonstrator, to enable
overland supersonic flight, and to future flight efforts as part of the Sustainable Flight National Partnership.
LaRC continues to push the boundaries for high-speed (supersonic and hypersonic) commercial flight and
contributes vehicle and airspace technologies to enhance the emerging Advanced Air Mobility market.
LaRC also leads and supports activities including manufacturing initiatives in composite structures and ma-
terials. The Center promotes public-private partnerships with in-space manufacturing and assembly and
supports industry partners developing commercial space transportation systems for access to low Earth
orbit and beyond. LaRC ensures that NASA leverages the burgeoning autonomy technology area to benefit a
variety of NASA missions.
LaRC hosts the program management office for NASA's GCD. GCD advances space technologies that may
lead to entirely new approaches for the Agency's future space missions and provide solutions to significant
national needs. LaRC also leads the Low-Earth Orbit Flight Test of an Inflatable Decelerator (LOFTID) project
for NASA's TDM. LaRC also participates in NASA's CIF, which supports emerging technologies and creative
initiatives, led by NASA scientists and engineers.
Additionally, the LaRC Technology Transfer Office ensures that innovations developed for aeronautics and
space are made more broadly available to the public.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
LaRC continues to transform the way it provides capabilities and conducts operations. Following the new
Agency-wide enterprise support model, LaRC works with the Office of Strategic Infrastructure and mission
directorate infrastructure groups, such as Aerosciences Evaluation and Test Capability, to fund and support
capabilities required by the Agency and the Nation to conduct NASA missions.
LaRC is committed to a diverse workforce, actively engaging and recruiting from underrepresented and
underserved groups and universities to find the best and brightest talents to solve NASA's challenges. Ad-
ditionally, LaRC supports the Agency's STEM efforts by providing leadership and contributions to STEM en-
gagement opportunities and activities.
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
MSFC leverages expertise in science, engineering, and project management to conduct scientific missions
and develop instruments, leading transformative discovery in core science and technology areas. MSFC's
expertise in developing applications and utilizing data informatics from space-based Earth-observing instru-
ments delivers responsive disaster analysis, lightning imaging, and weather forecasting products across the
United States, as well as global human benefit through the SERVIR program. MSFC scientists study the Sun's
dynamics to improve forecasts and study the "X-ray universe" of hot gases and X-rays emitted from objects
like black holes with the Chandra and Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE) observatories, along with
other high-energy instruments. MSFC develops state-of-the-art optics and instruments to understand the
origins of our universe. MSFC planetary scientists support the development of lunar surface processes and
the understanding of lunar habitability, as well as developing payloads and instruments for NASA's CLPS
program. The Planetary Missions Program Office manages a portfolio of robotic missions canvassing our
solar system, from the continuing Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter to larger missions like Europa Clipper that
will help us explore the possibility of life.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
MSFC serves as the space transportation design, development, and manufacturing leader for NASA. MSFC
leverages its expertise with large-scale, complex systems to develop the vital capabilities that will enable hu-
manity to return to the Moon to stay and explore on toward Mars. MSFC's systems engineering and integra-
tion expertise plays an important role in bringing together the work of the Agency and industry.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
66
MSFC is responsible for the SLS and its continued evolution to serve as a cornerstone for human deep space
exploration for decades to come. MSFC also manages NASA's human and large cargo landing transportation
systems, working with commercial partners to provide sustained access to the lunar surface. Additionally,
MSFC deploys new technologies on the ISS that will inform next-generation life support and research hard-
ware for Artemis MSFC also partners with industry to develop concepts for the lunar habitat for a sustained
human presence on the Moon's surface and a transit habitat for the journey to Mars.
MSFC's Payload Operations Center coordinates all U.S., European, Japanese, and Canadian scientific and
commercial experiments aboard the ISS, synchronizes payload activities of international partners, and di-
rects communications between crew members and researchers from around the world who have onboard
experiments. Drawing on more than two decades of experience serving as "Science Central" for the ISS,
MSFC will provide payload and mission operations support for a new generation of human spaceflight and
scientific exploration at the Moon and beyond.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
MSFC's leadership in human space exploration ignites economic growth opportunities while inspiring, edu-
cating, and improving life on Earth. MSFC partnerships with industry and academia advance and incorporate
Advanced Manufacturing Technologies (e.g., additive, welding, composites) for use on Earth and in space,
while establishing standards and qualifications for use in space flight. Additive manufacturing technology
developments are paving the way for future lunar and Mars in-situ surface construction.
MSFC's chemical propulsion expertise is at the forefront of innovation and development of advanced as-
cent, in-space, and lander propulsion systems. The development of these systems and related technologies,
including the development of long-term cryogenic fluid management for nuclear propulsion systems, are
essential to deep space human exploration. MSFC sustains current human presence in space through the
environmental control and life support systems aboard the space station and is advancing those systems
for long term and deep space exploration.
MSFC hosts the program management office for NASA's TDM. TDM focuses on ground and flight-testing
crosscutting technologies with strong customer interest that meet the needs of NASA and industry by en-
abling new missions or greatly enhancing existing ones. MSFC also leads the Space Nuclear Propulsion Proj-
ect for TDM as well as several maturation projects for NASA's GCD. In addition, MSFC participates in NASA's
CIF, which supports emerging technologies and creative initiatives led by NASA scientists and engineers.
MSFC also stimulates technological innovation through technology transfer and innovative Centennial Chal-
lenge competitions. Collectively, these activities provide business opportunities for industry and academia,
while also improving life on Earth.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
MSFC inspires the next generation of explorers through STEM activities and other outreach events such
as the Human Exploration Rover Challenge and Student Launch Initiative. MSFC's outreach extends to sec-
ondary and post-secondary education institutions alike, with a specific focus on inclusion of traditionally
underserved and underrepresented populations and institutions of learning. MSFC engages in education
outreach campaigns and routinely hosts interns each academic semester. These inclusionary activities serve
as a pipeline for recruitment of a talented and representatively diverse population that allows the Center to
shape the workforce to meet the demands of the evolving space industry. Just as MSFC seeks to inspire to-
day's next generation, it also continually seeks to develop its current workforce through technical, program-
matic, and personal training in an effort to prepare tomorrow's leaders to address the challenges they will
face as they inspire future generations.
By leading and providing key enterprise information technology systems, services, and infrastructure, MSFC
is enabling NASA's transformation to a new work paradigm that supports the needs of the Agency and the
employee alike. In this mission support role, MSFC enables the Agency's future while providing cybersecuri-
ty, network and application services, and secure data communications.
Stennis Space Center (SSC)
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge Through New Scientific Discovery.
SSC created and continues to enhance the Remote Sensing Toolkit, applying knowledge of remote sensing
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
67
applications and digital transformation to lower barriers to access NASA's Earth science data and the tools
to apply that data to benefit society.
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term Explora-
tion, Development, and Utilization.
SSC leverages expertise in the design, development, operation, and sustainment of large-scale, complex sys-
tems to provide unique facilities and expertise that enable research and development of current and emerg-
ing propulsion systems and launch vehicles. SSC tests the RS-25 engine and SLS Exploration Upper Stage for
NASA, as well as propulsion system components, engines, and stages for industry, to enable the exploration
and commercialization of space.
SSC develops innovative and transformational technologies that enable efficient, safe, deep-space explora-
tion and ground operations, and adapts commercial technology to enhance propulsion testing. SSC creates
intelligent, autonomous systems supporting the development of Gateway, lunar surface systems, in-situ re-
source utilization, space suits, and small satellites.
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges.
SSC is a catalyst for growth of the propulsion industry and the commercialization of space. SSC supports
development of the U.S. launch industry by testing the latest designs and transferring generations of experi-
ence to emerging companies. SSC accelerates development of the industry by leasing existing, underutilized
facilities or greenspaces for industry propulsion development, reducing development time and costs.
The SSC technology development program creates innovative, mission-ready solutions. Through public-pri-
vate and academic partnerships, SSC strengthens the U.S. industrial base in fields such as autonomous sys-
tems, digital twins, integrated systems health management, predictive and condition-based maintenance,
artificial intelligence and machine learning, embedded systems, and computational fluid dynamics.
The Autonomous Systems Lab (ASL) continually enhances the NASA Platform for Autonomous Systems, the
first platform for the development of Class A autonomous systems. The ASL provides best-in-class tools and
expertise to help NASA and industry develop robust, safety-critical, human-rated autonomous systems for
space missions and ground operations. The ASL works with NASA and other agencies to establish require-
ments for trusted autonomous space systems.
SSC participates in NASA's CIF, which supports emerging technologies and creative initiatives, led by NASA
scientists and engineers. SSC also enhances access to NASA technology by maintaining multiple technology
transfer processes for the Agency to drastically reduce licensing time while increasing process security.
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and Operations to Catalyze Current and Future Mission Success.
SSC works diligently with the MSD to transform local delivery of support services through the new enterprise
models. SSC provides significant cost savings to NASA through the consolidated contract for base operations
at both SSC and the Michoud Assembly Facility, as well as administering the Multiple Award Construction
Contract (MACC)-II regional construction contract. Similarly, SSC's unique facility operations cost-sharing
model with its Federal City tenants provides additional efficiency.
SSC supports a STEM portfolio with a diverse set of activities, education products, internships, challenges
and competitions, informal and formal education and out-of-school student learning activities, and educator
support. Robust face-to-face and virtual opportunities attract and retain students on STEM pathways with
significant attention on underserved and underrepresented students.
SSC's talent recruitment plan leverages the Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer's talent strategy by
utilizing Linkedln and Talent Marketplace to reach new and diverse candidates. SSC builds constructive rela-
tionships with schools and universities, community-based organizations, small businesses, and professional
associations to expand outreach to underrepresented communities and to create and maintain an inclusive
workplace culture.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
68
Appendix A: Learning Agenda
A Culture of Evidence
NASA has long held a culture of using evidence to inform its endeavors. As an Agency at the cutting edge of
exploration, scientific discovery, and technological development, NASA believes that frequently and thor-
oughly examining and evaluating its programs, missions, and projects leads to future success. NASA is com-
mitted to strong evidence-building practices, and the Learning Agenda is one of NASA's tools to identify the
priorities we believe will strengthen the Agency's policymaking through systematic evidence-building.
Establishing a Learning Agenda
NASA undertook a multi-year process to develop the first Learning Agenda as the Agency began to imple-
ment the Evidence Act and build the 2022 Strategic Plan. Under the leadership of NASA's Evaluation Officer,
the Agency set about planning for the Learning Agenda in 2019 to identify the learning priorities for the
Agency. The Evaluation Officer led an Evidence Act Working Group made up of representatives from NASA's
Mission Directorates and Centers, as well as technical and program experts to identify Agency priorities and
where evaluations would have the most impact for policymaking decisions.
Membership of the Evidence Act Working Group
Evaluation Officer / Performance Improvement
Officer
Rep., Office of Strategic Infrastructure
Statistical Official
Rep., Office of STEM Engagement
Chief Data Officer
Rep., Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer
Deputy Performance Improvement Officer
Rep., Glenn Research Center
Rep., Office of the Chief Information Officer
Rep., Kennedy Space Center
Rep., Office of the Chief Financial Officer
Rep., Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate
Rep., Office of the Chief Economist
Rep., Space Technology Mission Directorate
Rep., Office of Procurement
Rep., Science Mission Directorate
Table 1: Evidence Act Working Group
The Working Group initially identified nearly 70 priority questions, which were reviewed with stakeholders
to ensure the questions would provide the necessary evidence to make informed policy decisions. These
stakeholders included leadership from a diverse subset of divisions and directorates, who consistently en-
gage with academia, small business, and industry partners to inform our processes. In addition, Office of
Management and Budget (OMB), evaluation consultants from the General Services Administration (GSA),
and other Federal science agencies provided input on the Agency's identified priority questions. Once the
Priority Questions were solidified, the Working Group collected foundational data, refined the scope of each
question, and created an approach to answer the questions in the Learning Agenda.
NASA's Vision for Learning
NASA's Learning Agenda process is a continuous cycle of identifying priority areas for evidence and contin-
uous learning. Over the next four years, NASA will embed learning activities within the Agency's planned
evidence-building efforts. The Learning Agenda process establishes a formal tool for NASA to prioritize evi-
dence-building activities that advance the Agency's mission and operations in alignment with strategic initia-
tives.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
69
The multi-year process of creating and respond-
Engage
Update
stakeholders
ing to the Learning Agenda coincides with the
Learning
four-year timeframe for performance manage-
on agency
Agenda
learning
ment set forth in the NASA Strategic Plan, itself
priorities
developed every four years. By developing each
plan in tandem, NASA aligns the Agency's Stra-
tegic Objectives, management priorities, and
the evaluations it will undertake to answer Pri-
ority Questions into a single framework. NASA's
Use results to
Identify
Learning Agenda is transparent and promotes
inform agency
Priority
interest in and support for the studies, evalua-
efforts
Questions
tions, and other evidence that will follow.
NASA will leverage its many resources for eval-
uation, analysis, and other evidence-building
activities to answer the Learning Agenda Priority
Undertake
Questions. The Agency will use its established
Write the
Learning
capacity to conduct evidence-building activities
Learning
Agenda
Agenda
both internally and externally and use the re-
activities
sults for continuous learning and to make better
Figure 1: Learning Cycle: Developed from M-19-23
informed policy decisions. In the case where
NASA may not have the tools available within the
Agency, NASA has an extensive network of Fed-
erally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs), academic institutions, industry partners, and
citizen science to support evidence-building. We will leverage this additional knowledge base to further im-
prove our Learning Agenda process in future years.
NASA's FY 2022-2026 Priority Questions
NASA's Learning Agenda includes five Priority Questions that cover cost and schedule, digital and data ana-
lytics, early-stage technology innovation and partnership investment, improved access to opportunities, and
broadening participation. The Priority Questions address mission-critical areas for NASA that will require
evidence to improve Agency outcomes. In the development of the Priority Questions, NASA looked to both
strategic and operational needs as well as questions that could be answered in the near- and long-term.
Priority Question Categorization
Strategic (S)
Focus on how the Agency meets its mission
Focus on the efficacy of the Agency's operations, such as human resources, grant-making procedures,
Operational (O)
financial systems, and internal processes
Short-term (ST)
Evaluation will occur between 1-18 months
Long-term (LT)
Evaluation will occur over 18+ months
Table 2: Priority Question Categories
The Priority Questions cover focus areas of strategic or operational importance to the Agency with the po-
tential to impact the way NASA operates and carries out its mission. NASA will build evidence and data that
supports its Strategic Objectives, Corrective Action Plan (CAP) initiatives stemming from Government Ac-
countability Office (GAO) reports, and Management Challenges stemming from Office of Inspector General
reports. This information will provide senior leadership with evidence to inform future policymaking. The
table below outlines NASA's 5 priority questions.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
70
PQ#
Priority Question
Focus
Expected Results
PQ1
How can NASA enhance its early-stage innovation and partnership investment strat-
S
LT
egies to support American leadership in space technology?
PQ2
To what extent do NASA's cost and schedule models, when used early in spaceflight
S
LT
project development, accurately predict final costs and schedules?
To what extent has the Enterprise Data Platform (EDP) been adopted and used to
PQ3
O
ST
drive decision making?
PQ4
How do NASA's procurement and grant practices advance equity for improved ac-
O
LT
cess to opportunities for underserved communities?
How do NASA Internships broaden participation of underrepresented and under-
PQ5
O
ST
served students to advance equity and build a diverse future STEM Workforce?
Table 3: Priority Question Outline
As previously mentioned, NASA aligns the Agency's Strategic Goals and Objectives to its Learning Agenda.
These Goals and Objectives, as defined in the Agency's Strategic Plan, have been restated in Table 4 below.
Table 5 demonstrates how each priority question correlates to these Goals and Objectives.
Theme
Goal
Statement
1.1 Understand the Earth system and its climate
Expand human knowledge
Discover
through new scientific
1.2 Understand the sun, solar system, and universe
discoveries
1.3 Ensure NASA's science data are accessible to all and produce practical
benefits to society
2.1 Explore the surface of the moon and deep space
Extend human presence to
the Moon and on towards
2.2 Develop a space economy enabled by a commercial market
Explore
Mars for sustainable long-
term exploration, develop-
2.3 Develop capabilities and perform research to safeguard explorers
ment, and utilization
2.4 Enhance space access and services
Catalyze economic growth
3.1 Innovate and advance transformational space technologies
Innovate
and drive innovation to
address national challenges
3.2 Drive efficient and sustainable aviation
Enhance capabilities and
4.1 Attract and develop a talented and diverse workforce
Advance
operations to accelerate
current and future mission
4.2 Transform mission support capabilities for the next era of aerospace
success
4.3 Build the next generation of explorers
Table 4: NASA's Strategic Goals and Objectives
NASA Priority Questions/Strategic Goals & Objectives Crosswalk
Strategic Goals and Strategic Objectives
PQ1
PQ2
PQ3
PQ4
PQ5
Strategic Goal 1, Strategic Objective 1.1
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 1, Strategic Objective 1.2
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 1, Strategic Objective 1.3
X
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 2, Strategic Objective 2.1
X
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 2, Strategic Objective 2.2
X
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 2, Strategic Objective 2.3
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 2, Strategic Objective 2.4
X
X
X
X
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
71
Strategic Goal 3, Strategic Objective 3.1
X
X
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 3, Strategic Objective 3.2
X
X
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 4, Strategic Objective 4.1
X
X
Strategic Goal 4, Strategic Objective 4.2
X
X
X
Strategic Goal 4, Strategic Objective 4.3
X
Table 5: NASA Priority Questions/Strategic Goals & Objectives Crosswalk
Priority Question #1
How can NASA enhance its early-stage innovation and partnership investment
strategies to support American leadership in space technology?
Alignment to Strategic Goals and Objectives
Strategic Goal 1
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Goal 4
SO 1.1: Understand the
SO 2.1: Explore the sur-
SO 3.1: Innovate and ad-
SO 4.2: Transform mis-
Earth system and its
face of the moon and
vance transformational
sion support capabilities
climate
deep space
space technologies
for the next era of aero-
space
SO 1.2: Understand the
SO 2.2: Develop a space
SO 3.2: Drive efficient
sun, solar system, and
economy enabled by a
and sustainable aviation
universe
commercial market
SO 1.3: Ensure NASA's
so 2.3: Develop capa-
science data are acces-
bilities and perform
sible to all and produce
research to safeguard
practical benefits to
explorers
society
SO 2.4: Enhance space
access and services
Theory of Change
If NASA can identify strategies that broaden our base of innovators, facilitate effective transition and trans-
fer of promising innovations for mission infusion and commercialization, and strengthen the community
with whom we work, then we will help ensure American leadership in space technology.
Context
Through its Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD), NASA provides a robust national space technol-
ogy engine to meet agency and national aspirations and builds a foundation for a self-sustaining U.S. space
economy. As one part of this strategy, NASA invests in innovative early-stage technology concepts that could
lead to future breakthrough capabilities, enable new mission paradigms, and foster growth of the U.S. space
economy. We recognize that the "high-payoff" promise of early-stage innovation is most often accompanied
by higher risk. Accordingly, we anticipate that most early-stage investments may not advance for further
development beyond the initial investigation. Nonetheless, those that do may eventually change what's pos-
sible in aerospace.
NASA will assess its current strategy for investments in early-stage innovation and partnerships with the
intention of implementing policy and process improvements or pilots that increase the likelihood of creat-
ing the technology breakthroughs of tomorrow. We will take stock of what is working well and what could
benefit from improvement. NASA will consider alternative approaches, especially those that have proven
successful within other organizations. We may conduct specific evaluations and/or small-scale pilot studies
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
72
to assess potential new policies and procedures. NASA will continue to assess its progress and strive for
continual improvement, refining and developing new quantitative and qualitative success measures accord-
ingly. Together, these activities will provide a foundation of evidence to better inform NASA's investment in
early-stage innovation.
While other areas of focus may surface during NASA's assessment of its current strategies, we initially antici-
pate focusing on a few key elements of early-stage and partnership investment strategy:
Sourcing ideas from a broad base of innovators, including those from underserved and underrep-
resented communities. We theorize that a broad base of innovators helps ensure new perspectives
and more comprehensive capture of promising ideas.
Ushering technologies through the "valleys of death." In R&D, the "valley of death" is a commonly
used metaphor to describe an inherent gap between adjacent stages of development, requiring
technology transition. For the purposes of this learning agenda, we will place particular emphasis
on the transition of early-stage innovation to the technology maturation phase of development.
Transferring space technology into the space economy. In addition to creating technological break-
throughs, STMD is committed to transferring technologies beyond NASA, fostering commercializa-
tion opportunities, and growing the U.S. space economy.
Approach
NASA will address this priority question through a combination of fact finding, analysis of programs and ex-
isting policies, evaluations of proposed policy and process improvements or pilots, and related performance
measurement improvements. We plan to conduct these activities during the period of FY 2022 - FY 2026.
However, we recognize the need for a low-level of continual assessment beyond that period, particularly
due to the often-longer term timeframe for impact - often 10-20 years or more - of early-stage concepts.
We elaborate on this approach in the subsequent sections.
Evidence-building activities
To address this priority question, NASA will employ a variety of evidence-building activities spanning the cat-
egories of fact-finding research, policy analysis, program evaluations, and performance measurements.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Review prior studies for relevant data
Foundational Fact Finding
FY 2022-2026
Description: Investment in early-stage technology development and transfer, along with basic research,
remains a cornerstone of U.S. technology advancement and leadership. NASA's current strategy for ear-
ly-stage investment is already built upon evidence gained from decades of prior experience within and
beyond NASA. It employs acquisition strategies that leverage various sources of innovation and encourage
continued development of promising ideas.
That said, measuring the effectiveness of specific strategies and approaches to early-stage investment is
particularly difficult, even within the context of other research and development programs, partly because
of the long development times necessary to recognize the benefit and impact of early-stage concepts. The
often complicated development paths to ultimate implementation make it difficult to even trace break-
throughs to originating research. Nevertheless, in exploring potential enhancements to our current strate-
gies, NASA has at its disposal a wide range of studies and analyses from which to draw evidence. In 2017, for
example, NASA STMD commissioned a benchmarking study conducted by the Science and Technology Policy
Institute (STPI) that examined NASA investment in early-stage innovation as compared to several other U.S.
Government agencies and organizations. NASA's Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program has
also supported a number of National Academies studies focused on impact evaluation and improvement. In
2019, SBIR also commissioned a report to establish an initial understanding of the role the U.S. Government
has played in supporting an entrepreneurial approach to space. We shall revisit these and other studies for
relevant evidence and with particular focus on the aforementioned key elements of this priority question
learning agenda. Similarly, we will review other relevant studies from within NASA and beyond.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
73
Fact-finding could also occur through data collection from the NASA innovation community, including pre-
vious proposers to STMD's Early-Stage Innovation and Partnerships (ESIP) on their experience with the pro-
grams. STMD has two methods available for clearing surveys through OMB related to customer experience
for external communities:
1. NASA received a Section 280 clearance Nov 4, 2020.
2. NASA also has access to a Fasttrack process for customer experience surveys.
STMD will choose one or the other primarily based on the way we intend to use the data and secondarily
on administrative concerns (e.g., burden-hours remaining, clearance durations). Data collected under a
Fasttrack clearance cannot be published (e.g., to performance.gov or used to make material policy chang-
es, while data collected under a Section 280 clearance can. Surveys conducted under Section 280 provide
more flexibility with how we can use the incoming data-ever allowing us to make material programmatic
and policy changes based on the survey's data. NASA STMD has developed a strong relationship with the
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs desk officer who clears these customer experience surveys. In
fact-finding to understand potential barriers and adjustments from the vantage point of our external part-
ners and stakeholders, STMD may also leverage this data collection approach.
Potential Methods: Assessment of existing studies, reports, and metrics:
2019 NASA-commissioned Space Angels report: U.S. Government Support of the Entrepreneurial Space
Age
2017 NASA-commissioned STPI early-stage innovation benchmarking study
2010 Capabilities for the Future: An Assessment of NASA Laboratories for Basic Research, National Acad-
emies Press
Other NASA studies and National Academies reports
Extended literature searches to include relevant studies conducted by other Government agencies,
academic institutions, etc.
Customer experience surveys (Section 280 or Fasttrack)
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Analysis of existing programs and project data
Policy Analysis
FY 2022-2026
Description: With approximately 10 years of experience across multiple early-stage innovation and
partnership programs, STMD has at its disposal a wide array of information and data with which we
continue to assess the effectiveness of our programs and policies. Individual STMD ESIP programs have
already implemented internal performance measures relevant to the key elements of this priority question
learning agenda, including those related to diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) and transition
of promising concepts and technologies. Also, the recently appointed STMD Program Director for Early-
Stage Innovation and Partnerships is tasked with addressing measures of success and other policy analysis
across the entire STMD ESIP portfolio.
In exploring potential ladjustments/improvements to our current strategies, NASA will conduct analyses of
existing STMD program and project data regarding DEIA, technology transition rates, patterns of STMD tech-
nology transition both within and beyond other STMD programs, analyses of technology transfer data, and
other relevant analyses of available data. Wherever possible, we also will leverage other concurrent initia-
tives that may help inform this learning agenda, including STMD's ongoing strategic framework and acquisi-
tion planning activities.
Potential Methods: Analysis of STMD information and data may include:
Analysis of existing STMD program data on DEIA and current transition rates
Analysis of patterns of transition and transfer within and beyond STMD programs, including any
policy, etc. barriers within STMD
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
74
Leveraging relevant insights from STMD's ongoing strategic architecture activities
Leveraging relevant insights from STMD's ongoing acquisition benchmarking study
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Engagement with researchers
Program Evaluation
FY 2022-2026
Description: As we clarify areas of focus through fact finding and policy analysis activities, we will continue
to define specific evaluations and pilot studies to assess the effectiveness of proposed policy and procedural
adjustments related to one or more of the aforementioned focus areas within the priority question: broad-
ening the innovation base, transitioning promising technologies, and transferring technology into the space
economy.
NASA STMD has identified its first evaluation as part of this priority question learning agenda. Planned for
execution in FY 2022 and detailed in NASA's FY 2022 Annual Evaluation Plan (AEP), this initial evaluation
addresses the key elements of broadening NASA's innovation community and focuses specifically on NASA
engagement with researchers from Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) through the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program. This evaluation will
be conducted by NASA's SBIR/STTR program.
Potential Methods: Design and execution of evaluations in cooperation with GSA Office of Evaluation Scienc-
es:
FY 2022 evaluation design and evaluation implementation of potential improved engagement with
MSIs/HBCUs, conducted by STMD's SBIR/STTR program
Other evaluations, particularly those surrounding broadening the innovation community, facilitating
effective technology transition, and transferring technology into the space economy.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
FY 2022-2026 (Annu-
Reporting on goals, objectives, and outcomes Performance Measurement
ally)
Description: NASA, including programs within STMD's Early-Stage Innovation and Partnership (ESIP) portfo-
lio, continues to plan, assess, and report on its performance toward goals, objectives, and outcomes. This
includes public reporting in compliance with Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of
2010 (GPRAMA) and OMB guidance, but also extends to all levels of activity from the Mission Directorate lev-
el to individual programs to projects. In fact, STMD is currently in the process of expanding ESIP-related per-
formance measures to be publicly reported under NASA's FY 2022 and FY 2023 Annual Performance Plans.
As part of this priority question learning agenda, NASA will incorporate findings into its performance mea-
surement framework throughput the learning agenda timeline. We consider this one part of our commit-
ment to continual improvement. Such enhancements to performance measures will help provide more
insight into NASA's ESIP portfolio moving forward.
Potential Methods: Continued systematic performance tracking. Emphases may include:
Improving / expanding relevant program-level metrics
Improving / expanding GPRAMA-related reporting
Coordinating preliminary design level early-stage measures across programs
Exploring success measures beyond transitions
Continued emphasis on outcome-focused measures
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
75
Anticipated challenges and mitigation strategies
There are several anticipated challenges for this priority question learning agenda. Examples, along with as-
sociated mitigation strategies, include:
Challenge
Mitigation
Include resources for evaluation in budget requests.
Limited resources and time availability
Leverage existing efforts wherever possible
Long development time to realize eventual early-stage
Develop interim success measures for nearer-term impacts
investment benefits
of policy changes.
Leverage previous findings from other organizations
The inherent difficulty in measuring early-stage success
wherever possible
Work with other Government agencies experienced in eval-
Access to and sharing of data due to proprietary and policy
restrictions
uation to mitigate data sharing concerns. Include resources
for data quality improvements in budget requests
Work closely with OMB to understand and implement
The learning agenda concept is new to the Government,
process guidance. Work closely with other Government
including NASA
agencies experienced in evaluation
Continue to work closely with our partners to foster transi-
Reliance on external entities to advance promising ear-
tion. Include performance measures that specifically assess
ly-stage innovation
progress within NASA's control
Incorporate investigation of approaches to mitigate this chal-
Engaging with underrepresented communities
lenge directly into the learning agenda (e.g., our FY 2022
annual evaluation plan)
Table 6: Priority Question 1 Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Communicating Results
STMD will report on progress to NASA's Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) and OMB, including
relevant contributions to the NASA Volume of Integrated Performance (VIPer) and other performance docu-
ments which we anticipate will include Evidence-Act-relatec progress in future years. Additionally, we antici-
pate that findings from this learning agenda may result in updates to STMD's communication with the com-
munity of potential innovators, including improved guidance during the solicitation process. Results of this
process may inform communications with similar programs within other agencies, including collaboration
across SBIR/STTR programs. Analyses and evaluations conducted through this learning agenda also may re-
sult in published papers and/or presentations at conferences and workshops.
Priority Question #2
To what extent do NASA's cost and schedule models, when used early in spaceflight
project development, accurately predict final costs and schedules?
Alignment to Strategic Goals and Objectives
Strategic Goal 1
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Goal 3
SO 1.3: Ensure NASA's science
SO 2.1: Explore the surface of the
SO 3.1: Innovate and advance
data are accessible to all and pro-
moon and deep space
transformational space technol-
duce practical benefits to society
ogies
so 2.2: Develop a space economy
enabled by a commercial market
SO 3.2: Drive efficient and sus-
tainable aviation
so 2.4: Enhance space access
and services
Theory of change
If NASA can improve its ability to make better predictions early in program and project development in or-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
76
der to bound cost and schedule more appropriately, the Agency will be better able to deliver on its commit-
ments.
Context
NASA is on the cutting edge of scientific discovery and space exploration and develops large projects that
span multiple years or decades. A major management challenge for NASA is managing cost and schedule
given the technical complexity of these projects. Improving cost and schedule models should help NASA bet-
ter deliver on its commitments.
For NASA spaceflight projects, NASA utilizes three general techniques in helping inform Agency manage-
ment and external stakeholders with regards to predicting development cost and schedules.
1. Early in formulation, the Agency requires projects to produce probabilistic cost and schedule esti-
mates.
2. As a prerequisite to approval for implementation, the Agency requires projects to produce a proba-
bilistic model of its baseline plan to help inform Agency commitments
3. Lastly, within the implementation phase of development, the Agency utilizes earned value manage-
ment to measure projects' performance against that plan.
Given a project's lack of maturity during formulation, the probabilistic cost and schedule estimate incorpo-
rates the broad uncertainties regarding the project's scope, technical approach, safety objectives, acquisition
strategy, implementation schedule, and associated costs. The project team develops its cost and schedule
estimates using many different techniques. These include, but are not limited to, bottoms-up estimates
where specific work items are estimated by the performing organization using historical data or engineering
estimates; vendor quotes; analogies; and parametric cost and schedule models.
In addition to the requirement for projects to produce probabilistic cost and schedule analysis in formula-
tion, the Agency also conducts independent assessments on the probabilistic analysis. Independent assess-
ments of cost and schedule in early formulation often utilize agency parametric models as cross checks.
This priority question primarily deals with the Agency's in-house parametric capability to help inform early
formulation probabilistic cost and schedule estimates.
Parametric cost and schedule models utilize relationships between historic program costs/schedules and
technical parameters to predict future costs/schedules. Cost and Schedule Estimating Relationships (CERs/
SERs) are used to capture these relationships and are developed using statistical techniques - including re-
gression analysis. These models are a solid foundation for probabilistic cost and schedule estimating and
will generally do a good job of estimating unless: a project has major cost drivers not modeled by the CERs
(probably the source of outliers); the model does not contain data analogous to estimate; or the program-
matic content and approach are not defined properly (test hardware, development approach, funding avail-
ability, etc.).
Approach
NASA will continue to improve its cost and schedule model capability. NASA continually improves its model-
ing capability annually through:
1. Data Collection: NASA collects programmatic and technical data for every space flight project 5
times through its lifecycle (Cost Analysis Data Requirement).
2. Data Normalization and Analysis: NASA conducts statistical analysis (e.g. regression analysis) to
find what technical information drives both cost and schedule. Analysis is conducted annually but
Agency strives to update cost and schedule models on an 18-month cadence.
3. Model Development and Deployment: Analysis is packaged in models for the NASA cost and
schedule community to utilize. Model development allows analysts to use technical uncertainty and
historical variation to drive probabilistic cost and schedule analysis.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
77
Evidence-building activities
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Investigate technical drivers that drive cost
FY 2022-2026 (Conducted ev-
Foundational Fact Finding
and to what extent they do so
ery 12-18 months)
Description: Conduct statistical analysis of technical drivers that drive cost and to what extent. Analysis will
be updated as additional data is collected from completed NASA projects.
Potential methods: Various, but historically, principle component analysis and step-wise regression are uti-
lized.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Normalize new data and add to historic data
Foundational Fact Finding
FY 2022-2026 (Conducted ev-
set; historic data will be examined to deter-
ery 12-18 months)
mine relevance
Description: New data will be normalized and added to historic data set that drives analysis while existing
historic data will be examined to determine if it is still relevant.
Potential methods: Methods include normalizing for mission externalities, inflation, and block buys/builds.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Stratification of data will be examined for re-
FY 2022-2026 (Conducted ev-
fined CERs/SERs
Foundational Fact Finding
ery 12-18 months)
Description: Further stratification of data will be examined for refined CERs/SERs.
Potential methods: Principle Component Analysis, Step-wise Regression, and Multivariable Regression are
anticipated potential methods.
Anticipated challenges and mitigation strategies
Challenge
Mitigation
Include resources for evaluation in budget requests. Leverage
Limited resources and time availability
existing efforts wherever possible
Work closely with OMB to understand and implement process
The learning agenda concept is new to the
guidance. Work closely with other Government agencies experi-
Government, including NASA
enced in evaluation
Table 7: Priority Question 2 Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Communicating Results
Data analysis results for all NASA cost and schedule models are available to all NASA personnel. Analysis
statistical fits and descriptive statistics are available to broad distribution with each model's supporting doc-
umentation material.
Priority Question #3
To what extent has the Enterprise Data Platform (EDP) been adopted and used to
drive decision making?
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
78
Alignment to Strategic Goals and Objectives
Strategic Goal 1
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Goal 4
SO 1.1: Understand the
SO 2.1: Explore the sur-
SO 3.1: Innovate and ad-
SO 4.2: Transform mis-
Earth system and its
face of the moon and
vance transformational
sion support capabilities
climate
deep space
space technologies
for the next era of aero-
space
SO 1.2: Understand the
SO 2.2: Develop a space
SO 3.2: Drive efficient
sun, solar system, and
economy enabled by a
and sustainable aviation
universe
commercial market
SO 1.3: Ensure NASA's
SO 2.3: Develop capa-
science data are acces-
bilities and perform
sible to all and produce
research to safeguard
practical benefits to
explorers
society
SO 2.4: Enhance space
access and services
Theory of Change
If NASA implements enterprise-wide transformative digital and data analytics capabilities, then the agency
will be able to modernize its operations to make more informed mission, operational, research, and invest-
ment decisions that leverage the following six strategic thrusts:
1. Data: Better management and use of data makes mission execution easier and difficult goals more
attainable. NASA embraces a "One Data" culture that's free of siloes and promotes consistent man-
agement and metadata strategies across the agency, allowing NASA to pursue data-enabled insights
and decisions.
2. Collaboration: Collaboration across the agency is key to getting the most out of NASA's vast and
valuable data collections. We need a platform that allows us to efficiently and collaboratively create,
modify, analyze, visualize, and share data and data products using simple, integrated tools.
3. Model-based Everything (MBx): NASA is already a proponent of Model-based Engineering, which
is the application of formal modeling to support system requirements, design, analysis, and verifica-
tion and validation activities through the life of a project. Applying these principles more broadly will
bring key tenets of the Evidence Act into everything NASA does.
4. Process transformation: NASA's data consumers need the ability to efficiently use and share data
across the agency. Developing and promoting integrated process workflows ensures that NASA's
data is findable, accessible, understandable, secure, trusted, interoperable, and reusable.
5. Machine learning and artificial intelligence: Areas of effort include rote automation and semi-au-
tonomous systems focused on mission and scientific support and business operations. NASA is also
fostering a culture that is committed to ethical research, development, and application of machine
learning and artificial intelligence that is accountable, explainable and transparent, scientifically ro-
bust, and societally beneficial.
6. Culture and workforce: NASA's Enterprise Data Platform promotes a culture of data transparency,
fair and equal access, and collaboration across organizations. In addition, the EDP has applications
beyond NASA's scientific and mission organizations; workforce development and equity, finance,
and other infrastructure areas are early adopters.
Context
Before the Evidence Act was signed, NASA was a champion of free and open access to scientific data. NASA's
work incorporates and builds upon the work of others in a spirit of global engagement and diplomacy. The
growing culture of digital and data analytics allows NASA to build out a data-centric platform that supports
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
79
not only growing the foundations of our space-based missions, but also creates an environment where we
are able to better understand the context of our institutional data and interpret the data in different ways
for different results, maximizing on the return on investment of the data acquired.
In an attempt to maximize the return on investment of our data, NASA is constructing an Enterprise Data
Platform - easing the constraints NASA engineers, researchers, scientists, and technicians encounter when
they attempt to find, access, and share data. This platform, managed and operated by the Office of the Chief
Information Officer (OCIO), will build out an ecosystem of NASA's data enabling users to begin to use infor-
mation as a strategic asset.
NASA's data ecosystem is a massive source of untapped power, as NASA has as many pieces of data and
information as there are stars and planets in the sky. Data are distributed across many platforms and or-
ganizations, a situation that adds complexity in leveraging data as a strategic asset. Firewalls and access
controls create siloed data systems, which lead to incomplete data inventories, non-comprehensive search
capabilities, and no common enterprise approach to data governance. In many cases, current tooling often
requires a programming component and, in most cases, has a steep learning curve. NASA's workforce needs
simple and intuitive tools to locate, mine, harness, and translate NASA's data into timely actionable insights;
common and non-resource-intensive ways to fast-track data sharing; and a culture of "default to share" for
data. We imagine a future in which NASA's more than 17,000 employees can get the data they need, when
they need it, wherever they need it.
Approach
To address these data challenges facing the Agency, in FY 2021, OCIO and the Agency Business Innovation
Office (Digital Transformation Program) teamed to roll out an Enterprise Data Platform (EDP), which is a
suite of data management and analytics services to solve many common data management and analytics
problems using an enterprise approach. This "one-stop shop" consists of industry-leading products for data
virtualization and management, data modeling and analytics, and data visualization. These tools are secure-
ly hosted in the cloud and give users the ability to tap into the full power of NASA data while lowering the
barrier of entry for data storytelling. The EDP will contain a comprehensive data catalog or Yellow Pages of
NASA datasets to greatly increase data discoverability. Combined with a cultural shift in data sharing and
normalized data-sharing policies, data access can be accomplished in a more reusable manner as the EDP
will provide our Agency's data stewards with an enterprise platform to govern key NASA datasets. By work-
ing in this manner, the months and weeks that were previously required to find and gain access to data can
be drastically reduced to days and hours, enabling an agile data-analytics platform for Agency users. With
the EDP's suite of tools, the workforce will be empowered with low-code tooling to gain hindsight, insight,
and foresight into NASA's data.
Evidence-building activities
The Enterprise Data Platform is only as powerful as the data that feed it and the behaviors that drive it.
NASA will promote an open and collaborative data culture to enable more experimentation and discovery
while working with Agency data stewards to identify and contribute high-value datasets. We are working
with organizations to become early adopters by bringing use cases to test, learn, and evolve the platform.
To evaluate the extent of data-driven decisions made from the EDP, NASA will conduct the following activi-
ties:
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Track and measure how early adopters are
Performance Management
FY 2022-2023
using the EDP
Description: The Enterprise Data Platform is a multi-faceted tool with an iterative development and design
process. Understanding how early adopters are using the EDP helps drive development strategies and prior-
ities for future dashboards, visualizations, and other analytical tools, and informs communication strategies
for expanding use beyond the core group of early adopters.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
80
Potential methods: Track and measure how early adopters are using the EDP. Freeform sessions such as
focus groups or "office hours" will allow users to provide feedback to development and/or communication
teams and also share best practices with one another. Additional methods for assessing the success of the
EDP include sending out general user surveys, implementing a communications plan that includes the col-
lection of "before and after" metrics, and collecting and analyzing usage statistics directly within the platform
itself
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Evaluate the implementation of the EDP in the
Program Evaluation
FY 2022-2023
day-to-day use cases of the early adopters
Description: In addition to tracking and measuring general usage of the Enterprise Data Platform, it's critical
to confirm that the platform is meeting specific use cases that were documented during the requirements
gathering phase. Understanding if and how use cases have been addressed - and if any new use cases have
emerged post-adoption - will inform future iteration on the EDP as we incorporate new tools, data sets, and
workflows specifically targeted to the way people are using the platform.
Potential methods: Evaluate the implementation of the EDP and its adoption into day-to-day business pro-
cesses. Gather data and feedback through targeted user surveys focused specifically on previously identified
use cases and any new use cases which emerged post-adoption.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Track and measure the quantity of data sets
Performance Management
FY 2022-2025
on-boarded throughout the implementation of
the EDP
Description: NASA has a very large number of data sets, with new data sets being created all the time. For
the Enterprise Data Platform to be as useful and successful as possible, the data sets that feed into it must
be high quality both internally and externally. The data contained in the sets must be reliable, accurate, and
robust, and the data sets themselves must be the most relevant of their kind and comprise a broad library
of data from across the agency.
Potential methods: NASA is already developing an inventory of its high-quality data sets. This work, which
will be ongoing as new data sets are created and/or identified, ensures that the initial pool of data sets for
the EDP, while possibly not large, will be high quality and immediately useful and usable. As new data sets
are added to the EDP, their numbers will be tracked; the quantity of data sets, as well as access and usage
trends, will be analyzed by the development team throughout the roll-out and implementation of the EDP.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Evaluate the implementation and benefits after
Program Evaluation
FY 2024-2025
several years of EDP use
Description: After several years of adoption, the impacts of the Enterprise Data Platform will be felt beyond
the day-to-day activities of its primary users. The EDP will have created opportunities for organizations
within NASA, and NASA as a whole, to make more efficient use of time and resources and to ensure that
programs, missions, science, and workforce management are avoiding duplication of cost and effort with
respect to data modeling and analytics.
Potential methods: Assess the individual day-to-day use and benefits of the EDP, using both general and
targeted user surveys, and at an organizational level the extent that the EDP has led to data-driven decision
making at NASA. Comparative "before and after" analysis of infrastructure costs in areas such as licensing,
data storage and processing, platform administration, and network and security will demonstrate direct ef-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
81
fects on budgetary resources; secondary benefits and advantages will be identified and measured through
analysis of high-level decision-making trends within the agency.
Anticipated challenges and mitigation strategies
There are several anticipated challenges for this priority question learning agenda. Examples, along with as-
sociated mitigation strategies, include:
Challenge
Mitigation
Obtaining buy-in from owners of current visualization/
Work directly with data stewards and platform owners to com-
analytics tools that are locally maintained and will need
municate agency priorities and coordinate project timeline and
to be migrated into the EDP
migration schedules
Work with data stewards to identify key structured data sets,
Prioritizing data sets for inclusion in initial/early release
leverage Memoranda of Agreement to encourage participation
and buy-in
Identify and prioritize key core platform structure, develop a
Maintaining key core functionalities in face of technolo-
funding model for additional requested services over and above
gy creep and budget fluctuations
the core service stack
Improving access to and sharing of data while abiding
Leverage Al and machine learning to analyze data sets for insuf-
by proprietary and policy restrictions and improving
ficient or overly restrictive access controls
data security
Implementing enterprise-level instances of analytics
Develop a Decommission Plan to coordinate independent in-
tools and services and simplifying the ecosystem such
stances of tools and services. Decommission activities will begin
that duplicative functionality is reduced, without inter-
only after the cutover to the EDP has been fully executed
rupting current data analytics capabilities
Table 8: Priority Question 3 Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Communicating Results
OCIO will regularly report on progress on the Enterprise Data Platform to NASA's IT Strategic Board, and
to OMB. In addition, demonstrations and other information sessions targeted to the broader audience of
agency data stewards and other day-to-day users will be held, possibly modeled as a series of "Ask Me Any-
thing" sessions. As the EDP is rolled out to early adopters, the results of performance and experience mea-
surement will be communicated to OMB through the appropriate channels related to Evidence Act activities.
Additionally, we anticipate that findings from the early adopter cohort may result in updates to OCIO's com-
munication with the broader community of potential users, including improved guidance during the data
tagging and access management processes. The EDP intends to inform communication and collaboration
with similar programs within other agencies where data sharing is necessary and appropriate.
Priority Question #4
How do NASA's procurement and grant practices advance equity for improved access
to opportunities for underserved communities?
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
82
Alignment to Strategic Goals and Objectives
Strategic Goal 1
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Goal 4
SO 1.1: Understand the
SO 2.1: Explore the sur-
SO 3.1: Innovate and ad-
SO 4.1: Attract and de-
Earth system and its
face of the moon and
vance transformational
velop a talented and
climate
deep space
space technologies
diverse workforce
SO 1.2: Understand the
SO 2.2: Develop a space
SO 3.2: Drive efficient
SO 4.3: Build the next
sun, solar system, and
economy enabled by a
and sustainable aviation
generation of explorers
universe
commercial market
SO 1.3: Ensure NASA's
SO 2.3: Develop capa-
science data are acces-
bilities and perform
sible to all and produce
research to safeguard
practical benefits to
explorers
society
SO 2.4: Enhance space
access and services
Theory of Change
If NASA can understand what favorable procurement and grants practices provide more equitable oppor-
tunities to underserved communities, then NASA can establish new practices and policies and/or transform
its existing practices and policies to break down barriers that underserved communities may face in taking
advantage of agency procurement/contracting and grants/cooperative agreement opportunities.
Context
In January 2021, President Biden issued Executive Order 13985 on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for
Underserved Communities through the Federal Government. To meet the priorities of the memo, NASA
will explore how its procurement and grants practices advance equity for underserved communities. As de-
scribed below, these activities and processes are managed by three organizations across the Agency: the Of-
fice of Procurement (OP), the Office of Small Business Programs (OSBP), and the Science Mission Directorate
(SMD).
The NASA Headquarters Office of Procurement oversees the acquisition process and ensures Agency com-
pliance with the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the NASA FAR Supplement. The FAR guidelines
require Federal agencies to ensure that certain underserved communities have opportunities to compete
for Government contracts. FAR Part 19 covers small disadvantaged, Historically Underutilized Business
Zone (HUBZone), veteran-owned small business, service-disabled veteran-owned small business, and wom-
en-owned small business concerns. Subpart 8.700 outlines procurement guidelines when purchasing from
Nonprofit Agencies Employing People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled. NASA is committed to continu-
ously improving the ways it procures services and issues grants from all types of communities. The NASA
FAR Supplement, 1826.302, includes an HBCU/MSI goal which implements the Agency-wide 1 percent HBCU/
MSI goal.
NASA's OSBP promotes and integrates all small businesses into the competitive base of contractors that
pioneer the future of space exploration, scientific discovery, and aeronautics research for NASA. OSBP has
a very proactive outreach program to promote small business awareness and participation, utilizing innova-
tive techniques at nontraditional venues in geographically targeted areas, to enhance all categories of small
business. Due to the pandemic, OSBP participates in and hosts outreach events virtually. OSBP also has
an active small business mentor-protégé program, aggressive communication, and an outreach plan that
targets all of the aforementioned categories of small businesses. The goal of these activities is to educate,
inform and instruct small businesses on how to successfully compete for and win Government contracts,
prime and subcontracts and how to partner with large businesses for subcontracting opportunities as well
as joint ventures.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
83
Consistent with the cross-cutting priorities and strategies in the NASA Science Plan ("Science 2020-2024: A
Vision for Scientific Excellence"), SMD is committed to developing a scientific community that reflects the
diversity of the nation and instilling a culture of inclusion across its entire portfolio. This includes the com-
peted research opportunities that lead to the award of over a thousand grants a year NASA firmly believes
that success in these efforts will benefit not only NASA but also the entire scientific community and will help
bring the best minds and talent to understand, innovate, and tackle challenging issues like climate change.
Understanding what effective strategies work to advance equity for NASA opportunities will help NASA ad-
vance its priorities in the diversity, equity, and inclusion space and plan for ways to best achieve agency pri-
orities.
Approach
OSBP uses the following tools to increase participation of underserved communities in procurement.
OSBP NASA Vendor Database (NVDB) is open to all vendors, both large and small, who wish to do
business with NASA. Interested businesses and HBCU/MSIs may register here; the current vendor
list is uploaded to the website at the end of each month. Members of the NVDB receive an easily
navigable Microsoft Excel file containing a vendor registration list monthly, which enables them to
conduct market research, a vendor search, MSI search and capability statement viewing. The cur-
rent vendor list is viewable to all registered NASA users here and external agency users here. All
NASA civil servants and contractor employees have access to the NVDB to search for firms and uni-
versities with capabilities to support the Agency mission with an emphasis on locating small busi-
nesses, including all categories of small businesses and HBCU/MSIs.
OSBP uses the United States Department of Education Accredited Postsecondary Minority Institu-
tions lists and the White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities through the
United States Department of Education to identify MSIs.
GSA Market Research Tool is used to seek businesses that represent underserved communities.
The OP works with OSBP on the issuance of Request for Information when searching for small busi-
nesses and HBCUs/MSIs to meet agency requirements.
The NASA Vendor Communication Plan represents NASA's commitment to continued and increased dia-
logue and exchanges of information with the vendor community from the earliest identification of a require-
ment through announcement of the award (see FAR subpart 15.2). The Plan outlines the communication
framework for recurring vendor engagement with OP Senior Leadership and OP acquisition workforce
during the acquisition cycle. OP uses the following events to engage audiences that can promote and solicit
more interaction from underserved communities.
Regular meetings with businesses to discuss their capabilities;
Meetings with other agencies such as the Small Business Administration (SBA), U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, Minority Business Development Agency Department of Defense Department of
Defense, GSA and other Federal Government agencies to participate in their outreach efforts with
small businesses;
Quarterly industry forums with members of the underserved communities identified in EO 13985;
Quarterly meetings with Council of Defense and Space Industry Associations; and
Regular meetings with Source America-Ability One representatives to discuss opportunities for con-
tractors that employ persons with disabilities.
OP plans to take the following additional outreach efforts to enhance equity in contracting:
Convene targeted small group virtual forums with HBCUs/MSIs;
Attend National HBCU Week; and host meetings with various minority-based associations and orga-
nizations, such as National Society of Black Physicists, National Society of Black Engineers, American
Indian Science and Engineering Society, American Indian Higher Education Consortium, Great Minds
in STEM, Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers, Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
84
& Native Americans in Science, Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers, Women of Color, and Soci-
ety of Women Engineers.
OP plans to continue supporting OSBP's meetings, outreach events and OSBP Learning Series with
small businesses to share information on how to do business with NASA, NASA's acquisition fore-
cast, NASA enterprise delivery model, how to comply with new acquisition practices, etc.
The NASA Research Announcements SMD uses to solicit unique research programs that result in the award
of grants, is one of the Agency's most direct mechanisms to impact the scientific community and thus rep-
resents an invaluable opportunity to gauge and advance equity. SMD's approach to advancing equity for
underserved communities in the scientific competition process is based on the following:
Identifying, understanding and co-developing solutions to addressing the obstacles underserved
communities and individuals face when it comes to participating in the process;
Piloting alternative approaches and modeling the success of other scientific organizations to inform
new processes and policies; and
Performing analysis of quantitative and qualitative assessment tools to measure impact of policy
changes.
Evidence-building activities
NASA is committed to improving research grant and procurement opportunities for underserved commu-
nities. A combination of evidence-building activities, detailed below, will help NASA inform its policies and
procedures to answer the question, "How do NASA's procurement and grant practices advance equity for
improved access to opportunities for underserved communities?" NASA's OP in partnership with OSBP will
accomplish the evidence-building activities associated with procurement policies and practices and NASA's
SMD will accomplish the evidence-building activities associated with grant policies and practices.
Science Mission Directorate
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Analysis of grant application and selection data. Foundational Fact Finding
FY 2022-2026
(Annually)
Description and Potential methods: The analysis of grant application and selection data will inform the
grant-related practices and process, which will advance equity for improved access to opportunities for un-
derserved communities. The primary source of data to help SMD evaluate the impact on equity of grant pol-
icies and procedures is the ongoing analysis of grant application and selection data, including voluntary
demographic data, collected by the Office of the Chief Scientist. Expanded analysis of this data will be
paired with identifying relevant studies and continuing to model the successful practices of other leading
scientific organizations such as the Space Telescope Science Institute and the National Academies of Sci-
ence, Engineering and Mathematics.
SMD will also explore opportunities to expand the categories it uses to evaluate success based on available
data. For instance, SMD can incorporate analysis of the different types of institutions that proposers belong
to using benchmarks in research activity and expenditures as defined by the Carnegie Classification of In-
stitutions of Higher Education. These other considerations, added to the analysis on a systematic basis, will
expand the dimensions of diversity that SMD considers when assessing equity in the proposal review and
selection process.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Review results from adoption of DAPR to an
Program Evaluation
FY 2022-2026
expanded set of ROSES grant categories
(Annually)
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
85
Description and Potential Methods: The annual review of grant selection data will support SMD's evaluation
of the dual-anonymous peer review process (DAPR) in advancing the equitability of male versus female re-
search proposal selection under the Hubble Space Telescopio Program. Following the success of the process
under the Hubble Space Telescopic observing program, SMD began evaluating proposals submitted to nu-
merous grant awards in the Research Opportunities in Space and Earth Science (ROSES) program elements
using DAPR in 2020. As a result of the pilot, SMD saw improvements, both in terms of the overall quality of
the review process, as well as in the demographics of awardees. SMD will expand the use of DAPR across
the gamut of grant programs to apply the lessons learned from this experience to inform and institutional-
ize the policies that will advance equity in the grant review process.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Develop and analyze formal surveys or
Policy Analysis
FY 2022-2026
other qualitative feedback tools from targeted
activities
Description and Potential methods: SMD will put in place other mechanisms to identify areas of improve-
ment to access to grants for underserved communities on a recurring basis. This may include data analysis
of surveys or other qualitative feedback tools following proposal-writing workshops at national conferences,
panel reviewer trainings on cognitive biases, and other targeted activities.
Office of Procurement & Office of Small Business Programs
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Analyze ability to meet small business goals
Performance Measurement
FY 2022-2023
Description and Potential Methods: OSBP, in partnership with the OP, serves as the lead organization man-
aging NASA's utilization of small businesses and underrepresented communities in support of the Agency
mission through the direct award of prime dollars and subcontracted dollars to small businesses and under-
represented communities. Within NASA the center procurement offices are assigned small business goals to
encourage and incentivize the utilization of small businesses in response to NASA procurement opportuni-
ties. OSBP works closely with the NASA end user communities and OP to help small businesses understand
and be prepared to support NASA mission requirements.
The NASA Acquisition Forecast, OSBP Mobile App, and OSBP Active Contracts Lists provide information to
the small business community to understand and prepare to support NASA. OSBP will also leverage the
Office of Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD) and the Office of STEM Engagement (OSTEM) pro-
grammatic activities in utilizing small businesses and underrepresented communities in support of the
NASA mission. OSBP works with STMD and their management of the Agency's Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. These programs are highly com-
petitive programs that encourage domestic small businesses to engage in Federal-funded Research and De-
velopment (R/R&D) with the potential for commercialization. OSBP leverages the activities and support that
OSTEM provides to HBCUs, Hispanic Serving Institutions, Tribal Colleges, Asian American and Pacific Islander
Serving Institutions (AAPISI), and Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) to increase these institution's awareness,
participation, and support of NASA programmatic mission needs and requirements.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Develop and analyze formal surveys or
Policy Analysis
FY 2022-2026
other qualitative feedback tools from targeted
activities
Description and Potential methods: In an effort to advance equity and ensure improved access to contract
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
86
opportunities for underserved communities, OSBP and OP plan to engage underserved communities by
soliciting feedback. This may include surveys or feedback tools following proposer or reviewer trainings and
workshops. Data analysis from formal surveys or other qualitative feedback tools from targeted activities,
such as the proposal-writing workshops at national conferences, and panel reviewer trainings on cognitive
biases will provide data that can impact NASA's procurement processes, policies and procedures.
OSBP and OP are preparing formal surveys to be issued at contractor engagement events as early as 4th
quarter FY 2022; however, other qualitative feedback tools are still being researched. Therefore, the results
of the analysis of the surveys and other qualitative feedback tools will be complete and ready for use by the
1st quarter of FY 2026.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Assess the effectiveness of NASA's current
Policy Analysis
FY 2022-2026
outreach efforts
Description and Potential Methods: In an effort to advance equity and encourage greater participation of all
categories of small business contractors in the Government contracting process, OP and OSBP will develop
and establish new procurement policies and practices that incentivize contractors, through tailored evalua-
tion criteria during the solicitation process to: 1) partner with members of underserved communities, includ-
ing HBCUs/MSIs; 2) diversify its own workforce to add underrepresented employees; 3) identify and utilize
small businesses in underserved communities; and 4) identify and utilize small business subcontractors
that operate in historically underutilized populations - rural and/or urban areas. OP will also develop and
enhance existing policies and practices to encourage use and support of the Ability One Program, one of the
nation's largest providers of jobs for people who are blind or have significant disabilities. NASA will contin-
ue to use its purchasing power to procure products and services from participating nonprofit agencies that
train and employ workers with disabilities. Additionally, NASA will continue to use the allure of its unique,
exciting, and inspiring mission to encourage agencies who train and employ workers with disabilities.
In order to do this, NASA has to obtain a better understanding of the effectiveness of its current outreach
efforts in increasing awareness of procurement opportunities to small businesses and underserved and un-
derrepresented communities. There could be opportunities to invest in IT data software and other resourc-
es to allow the collection and assessment of detailed vendor information and cloud marketing. However,
the Agency cannot determine the best path forward without first assessing the effectiveness of its current
strategies.
Policy analysis and development is an ongoing effort of continual improvement that will span the life of the
learning agenda and beyond. OP and OSBP will initially leverage ongoing and planned analyses and assess-
ments of solicitation practices and procurement policies during FY 2021. Policy development will begin in FY
2022 and be implemented by the 4th quarter of FY 2022. During FY 2022, OP will coordinate with OSBP and
establish policies and practices regarding the solicitation process to accomplish the four items listed above.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
87
Anticipated challenges and mitigation strategies
Challenge
Mitigation
The recommendations of the Equitable Data Working
Data collection limitations. NASA can evaluate demograph-
Group will be instrumental in understanding what addition-
ics of SMD's proposing and awarded researchers gathered
al information can be collected and how it should be used
by SMD and the Office of the Chief Scientist. However, lim-
to evaluate these and other efforts. Formal surveys of the
itations exist on gathering the types of data that are consis-
large community of proposers and reviewers would also be
tent with the dimensions of diversity as outlined in EO 13985
helpful but would require OMB approval per the Paperwork
Reduction Act
Uncertainty due to voluntary nature of data collection.
Currently, demographic data on SMD grant proposers/
awardees is collected on a fully voluntary basis via the
grants proposal submission system. While this remains the
SMD will consider and acknowledge this uncertainty and
intent, the need to consider response rate for any given
pair analysis of this data with other qualitative assessment
category of analysis creates uncertainty in the results. As
tools to evaluate the impact of specific policies
a consequence of these potentially large uncertainties,
some analysis of the data will not yield helpful results if,
for example, the response rate for a particular category
was especially low
Include resources for increased outreach and IT resourc-
Limited resources and time availability
es in budget requests. Leverage existing efforts wherever
possible
Work with the Office of Procurement and the end user
Category Management and NASA Product Service Lines
community early in the procurement process to make the
reduce the number of procurement opportunities available to
requirements user friendly for small business and underrep-
small businesses and underrepresented communities
resented communities' participation
Involve small businesses, underserved and underrepresent-
ed communities earlier in the procurement process. Reach
out to these communities as the NASA requirements are
being developed. Additionally, OSBP instructs small busi-
Development of business relationships with small business-
nesses, during outreach events and counselling sessions,
es, underserved and underrepresented communities is a
on the importance of businesses doing their homework to
long-term process
understand the NASA mission needs and to come to the
Agency with proposed solutions. This is a more proactive
approach which tries to position small businesses to be in a
better position to compete for NASA's prime and subcontract
awards
Practices and policy changes that are based on legislation/
Follow current practices and policies until legislation/statutes
statutes and Executive Orders (EO) will require a legislative
and EOs are changed
proposal or EO change to delete or change those policies
Table 9: Priority Question 4 Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Communicating Results
For its grant-related policies and processes, SMD will this work to inform internal and external stakehold-
ers. SMD will share these results internally through its standard strategic planning efforts. This will be in
the form of SMD-wide strategic planning and procedure documents, such as the Science Plan, and the SMD
Management Handbook, as well as division-specific materials that will highlight progress made in the area
of equity and serve as a building block for continuous improvement. As for external information sharing,
SMD will continue to share progress in this area with OMB and other stakeholders, such as Congress,
through formal briefings and in response to queries. These stakeholders will be briefed on updated proce-
dures, guidance, and the success and challenges of these efforts. This also pertains to the scientific/research
community that NASA engages with on a regular basis. SMD will work to continue the open dialogue with
relevant scientific institutions and the scientific community at large to convey the progress NASA is making
to advance opportunities for underserved communities, build accountability, and remain open to ideas
for
improvement.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
88
OSBP reports the progress made to the United States Small Businesses Administration annually with the
submission of the SBA Scorecard Report. The annual Scorecard is an assessment tool to 1) measure how
well Federal agencies reach their small business and socio-economic prime contracting and subcontracting
goals, 2) provide accurate and transparent contracting data, and 3) report agency-specific progress. The
prime and subcontracting component goals include goals for small businesses, small businesses owned by
women, small-disadvantaged businesses, service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses, and small busi-
nesses located in HUBZones.
Priority Question #5
How do NASA Internships broaden participation of underrepresented and
underserved students to advance equity and build a diverse future STEM Workforce?
Alignment to Strategic Goals and Objectives
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Goal 4
SO 3.1: Innovate and ad-
SO 4.1: Attract and de-
vance transformational
velop a talented and
space technologies
diverse workforce
SO 3.2: Drive efficient
SO 4.2: Transform mis-
and sustainable aviation
sion support capabilities
for the next era of aero-
space
SO 4.3: Build the next
generation of explorers
Theory of change
If NASA increases the number of interns from underrepresented and underserved communities who apply
to and are accepted for a NASA internship, there will be an increase in contributions to NASA's work from
diverse viewpoints and lead to full time employment that will strengthen the potential for a more diverse fu-
ture Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce across all industries.
Context
NASA makes vital investments in STEM engagement toward building a future diverse workforce. Given the
nation's need for a diverse, skilled STEM workforce and projected demands in order to meet future needs,
NASA clearly has a vested interest in helping to prepare and attract its future STEM professionals. Also,
the national STEM education ecosystem can benefit from NASA contributions toward attracting and re-
taining students on STEM pathways, with increased attention on underserved and underrepresented
students. NASA Internships are competitive awards to support NASA's goal of building a diverse future
workforce by providing unique NASA-related research and operational experiences for higher education
students. These opportunities serve students by integrating interns with career professionals emphasizing
mentor-directed, degree-related tasks and contributing to the operation of a NASA facility or the advance-
ment of NASA's missions. Since 2019, NASA Office of STEM Engagement (OSTEM) has executed performance
assessment and evaluation activities to assess the extent to which OSTEM investments have broadened par-
ticipation of groups historically underrepresented in STEM. This priority setting has been guided by OSTEM's
learning agenda question: How have NASA STEM Engagement investments broadened participation of his-
torically underrepresented and underserved groups in STEM fields in NASA STEM Engagement activities?
In FY 2021, OSTEM is continuing its continuous improvement efforts by executing an outcome assessment
to measure students' immediate outcomes of participating in NASA Internships and assess how and to what
extent interns are contributing to NASA's missions. Additionally, this study will identify sources of group
differences and address how NASA can continue to broaden participation of historically underrepresented
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
89
and underserved groups in STEM fields. Building on this effectiveness evaluation, OSTEM will expand its
assessment of how internships have broadened participation of groups historically underrepresented in
STEM. In alignment with the priority question: "How do NASA Internships broaden participation of underrep-
resented and underserved students to advance equity and build a diverse future STEM Workforce?", OSTEM
will conduct specific evidence activities to assess the effectiveness of NASA internships and identify practices
that are advancing equity and building a diverse future STEM workforce. OSTEM will use its evidence-based
decision-making process to assess what practices are working well and what practices could benefit from
improvement. OSTEM will consider alternative approaches, especially those that are supported by re-
search. These activities will provide a foundation of evidence that will inform NASA's efforts to develop a
diverse future workforce.
Approach
OSTEM will address this priority question through a combination of policy analysis, program evaluation, and
performance measurement activities. We plan to conduct these activities during the period of FY 2022-2026.
We elaborate on this approach in the subsequent sections.
Evidence-building activities
OSTEM will execute several key evidence-building activities that will build knowledge in support of the pri-
ority question. Using OSTEM's evidence-based decision-making process, we will use each evidence-building
activity to create a portfolio of evidence that will ultimately be used in support of the priority question.
OSTEM will serve as the lead organization for this priority question, although other NASA offices may con-
tribute evidence if relevant and aligned to the priority question. OSTEM will oversee the planning and execu-
tion of evidence-building activities for this priority question. Evidence-building activities will begin in FY 2022
as part of OSTEM's comprehensive performance assessment and evaluation strategy. OSTEM will leverage
its current Learning Agenda and integrate the priority question as a key OSTEM learning question during FY
2022. Each evidence-building activity will be executed as an annual assessment, beginning in FY 2022. OS-
TEM will review the portfolio of evidence annually and make changes to evidence-building activities as need-
ed.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Internship Program DEIA efforts
Policy Analysis
FY 2022
Description: The Internship Program DEIA efforts focus on recruitment, awareness, applicant and partici-
pant analysis, etc. OSTEM plans to utilize the knowledge gained during this initiative to determine best prac-
tices for reaching underserved student populations for internships.
Potential methods: Data analysis of program-specific data (e.g., descriptive statistics and aggregate indicators)
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
NASA Strategy for STEM Engagement
Policy Analysis
FY 2022-2023
Description: Through the policy analysis of NASA's Strategy for STEM Engagement, OSTEM expects to gain
valuable insights that will help determine what policies are in place that are currently leading to broadened
participation by underrepresented students. This analysis will also help determine which policies and action
plans are currently serving as barriers for participation for underrepresented students.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
FY 2022-2026
NASA STEM Gateway performance data
Performance Measurement
(annual reporting)
Description: NASA STEM Gateway is a universal registration and applicant data management system that
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
90
will collect non-traditional demographic information including geographic distribution (e.g., rural/urban sta-
tus and congressional district) and MSI designations. OSTEM will use this data to generate meaningful per-
formance metrics concerning underrepresented students in STEM internships.
Potential methods: Systematic tracking of performance data (e.g., program goals/objectives, participant de-
mographics)
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Internship Outcome Assessment Year 2 Study
Program Evaluations
FY 2022-2023
Description: The Internship Outcome Assessment Follow-On Study will generate short-term outcomes as-
sociated with participation in the internship program. Further details can be found in the Agency's FY 2022
and FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plans.
Potential methods: Analysis of findings of key evaluation studies; likely to include studies with the following
methodologies: quasi-experimental, pre-post design, implementation study, mixed method, etc.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Career Readiness Follow-On Study
Program Evaluations
FY 2022
Description: The Career Readiness Assessment will investigate the career readiness of early career NASA
STEM professionals who had a NASA internship prior to their employment as compared to those who did
not. The study will include analysis of differences based on underrepresented group status.
Potential methods: Analysis of findings of key evaluation studies; likely to include studies with the following
methodologies: quasi-experimental, pre-post design, implementation study, mixed method, etc.
Evidence-Building Activity
Evidence Category
Timeline
Performance Measurement,
FY 2022-2026
OSTEM Learning Agenda
Program Evaluations
(annual reporting)
Description: The OSTEM Learning Agenda will include an analysis of portfolio of evidence created through
performance and evaluation activities, which will help assess the extent to which OSTEM investments have
broadened participation of groups historically underrepresented in STEM.
Potential methods: Analysis of findings of key evaluation studies; likely to include studies with the following
methodologies: quasi-experimental, pre-post design, implementation study, mixed method, etc.
Anticipated challenges and mitigation strategies
There are several anticipated challenges for this priority question learning agenda. Examples, along with
associated mitigation strategies, include:
Challenge
Mitigation
Limited resources and time availability
Include resources for evaluation in budget requests.
Leverage existing efforts wherever possible.
Transition to new universal registration/application and per-
Ensure performance and evaluation requirements are inte-
formance management system
grated into system development for performance reporting.
Develop interim success measures for nearer-term impacts
Longitudinal tracking of internships participants may be
difficult
of policy changes; leverage NASA STEM Gateway as a
vehicle for data collection.
Create a schedule of tasks and milestones that can be used
Schedule slippage
to monitor evidence-building activities.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
91
Lack of reflection of DEIA efforts by the Office of Chief
Human Capital Officer, Office of Diversity and Equal
Ensure priority question is broad enough to reflect work of
other NASA offices.
Opportunity, Office of Communications, and Missions
Limitations on data collection for individual participant de-
mographics include necessary compliance with Paperwork
Opportunities exist to find appropriate methods to collect
Reduction Act requirements and self-reported/voluntary
other demographic data through the NASA STEM Gateway
response, including the reluctance of some communities to
and leveraging other Federal datasets.
respond to demographic questions.
Table 10: Priority Question 5 Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
Communicating Results
OSTEM will report on progress to the NASA STEM Engagement Council, NASA OCFO, and OMB, including
relevant contributions to the NASA Volume of Integrated Performance (VIPer) and other performance docu-
ments. Additionally, we anticipate that findings from this priority question may result in updates to OSTEM's
Learning Agenda and will be shared with OSTEM leadership as part of OSTEM's continuous improvement
process. Analyses and evaluations conducted through this Learning Agenda also may result in published pa-
pers and/or presentations at conferences and workshops.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
92
Appendix B: Capacity Assessment
NASA's Capacity Assessment
Evidence-building capacity at NASA is wide and varied. Led by NASA's Evaluation Officer, in conjunction with
the Statistical Officer and Chief Data Officer, five criteria guide NASA's evidence culture: coverage, quality,
methods, effectiveness, and independence.
Coverage at NASA ensures that evidence-building activities are conducted extensively across the
Agency's Centers and Mission Directorates to maintain a distribution of capacity and to target those
programs and operations at NASA that require greater analysis.
Quality evidence-building efforts produce reliable and robust results that provide information use-
ful for NASA leadership to make decisions.
Methods or methodological approaches are carefully considered within NASA to ensure that the
right quantitative and qualitative approach is chosen and tailorable to best collect and understand
measurement data in each design and assessment.
Effectiveness is a measure of outcomes to determine whether a policy or program achieved specific
objectives and how efficiently resources were expended. NASA develops its evidence-building activi-
ties to drive impact across the Agency.
Independence at NASA revolves around objectivity and requires that Agency staff and contractors
uphold rigorous, ethical, and transparent research practices to ensure findings are externally valid
and credible. NASA's commitment to independence means that statistics, evaluations, research, and
analysis efforts across the Agency are performed impartially and free from undue influence.
In accordance with the requirements of the Evidence Act, NASA enacted the NASA Policy Directive 1210.7,
which establishes the standards of evaluation and statistical practices and the authority of the Evaluation
Officer to oversee Agency-wide evidence-building activities. Further, NASA created an Evaluation Manage-
ment Process Champion position, who leads an interagency working group across Centers and Mission Di-
rectorates to establish and maintain an evaluation management line of business.
To help identify the Agency's evidence-building activities and assess them, NASA designed a survey that was
distributed across the Centers and Mission Directorates. The survey was used to understand what statistics,
evaluation, and research and analysis activities were being conducted within the Agency and how to char-
acterize them against the standards established by Office of Management and Budget (OMB). The details of
this survey-based approach are described in the following sections.
Assessment Scope and Method
The requirements for what to include in the Capacity Assessment are detailed in M-19-23, which gave agen-
cies the flexibility to identify how such an assessment can be conducted. Prior to identifying an assessment
method, NASA defined how to properly scope this effort. The intent was to capture cross-portfolio activities
that inform decision-making within the Agency. This cross-portfolio approach set parameters around the
collection of evidence-building activities to ensure an extensive yet practical list.
Using OMB's definitions for statistics, evaluation, and research and analysis, it was important to understand
how these terms translated and applied to NASA processes. NASA's programs and projects are organized by
Mission Directorates and then governed by a Center. In order to get an accurate landscape of the Agency's
capacity, identifying just a Mission Directorate and/or Center may not capture potential evidence-building
activities. Therefore, it was important to identify representatives from each Mission Directorate and Center
to ensure that the appropriate activities were included. Also, there is a Program Planning & Control (PP&C)
function within the Agency that provides cost, schedule, risk, and resource support to programs and proj-
ects. These individuals are matrixed to various organizations to support any ongoing assessments. Including
the PP&C community as participants in this assessment help ensure those additional analyses are being
identified to help characterize the Agency's capacity. With representation from the Mission Directorates,
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
93
Centers, and the PP&C community, NASA had identified where evidence-building domains occur across the
Agency, and a comprehensive way to examine capacity criteria.
After identifying individuals who know of or perform statistical, evaluation, and research and analysis ac-
tivities at NASA, the activities needed to be efficiently identified. NASA executed a two-phased approach to
gather such data. Phase 1 consisted of a 17-question survey. Given the diverse staff roles and needing a
mechanism to solicit Agency evidence-building activities, a survey method was selected to gather the initial
information. A survey was used because 1) it allowed the participants the flexibility to provide responses
within their availability, 2) it was more efficient than interviewing each individual, and 3) it served as a gate-
way to identify future methods for gathering data. This method was also the most efficient choice, at the
time, due to resource limitations and clear guidance of what evidence-building activities are being conduct-
ed within the Agency. NASA was aware that using a self-reporting mechanism within a survey can introduce
high levels of optimism and biased responses. Therefore, to offset the potential biases and attempt to val-
idate the responses, the second phase of the approach included not only seeking input from the analysis
practitioners but also from the senior leadership of the Mission Directorates and Centers to gain better in-
sight into if the results from analyses influence policy and decision-making.
Phase 1 of the Capacity Assessment Survey concluded in Spring 2021. NASA received 47 completed surveys
from the communities described above. The survey was initially sent to 35 persons and they had the ability
to share the survey with other individuals in their division or center who may conduct evidence-building
activities. The initial recipients were point of contacts within NASA's Performance/Evaluation and PP&C
communities. These persons represented the practitioners that either conduct or know of individuals that
conduct evidence-building activities. Since some of the surveys could have been forwarded repeatedly to
individuals across the Agency, it is difficult to quantify the true response rate. NASA can comment that the
individuals that received the survey took a careful approach in answering the questions and characterizing
their evaluations, statistical and/or research analyses.
The objective of Phase 2 was to engage senior leadership of the identified evaluation communities and iden-
tify what type of evidence-building data is used towards their policy-making decisions. Phase 2 of the survey
was distributed in Fall of 2021 with a response rate of approximately 71 percent. The results did verify the
responses from Phase 1, concluding that the evidence-building analyses that is executed within the Agency
is being utilized towards decision and policy making.
Assessment Survey
The requirements outlined in M-19-23 helped guide which questions to include in the survey. The survey
was comprised of 6 sections with a total of 17 questions. Along with open-ended questions, a 5-point Likert
scale (Excellent, Good, Fair, Poor, Very Poor) was also used to evaluate capacity criteria related to coverage,
quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of the identified activities. The survey responders were
to answer the questions based on the analysis that their office or organization conducted. For example, if a
person worked for the PP&C branch of a certain mission directorate then their responses were to help un-
derstand the evidence-building activities within that mission directorate.
In addition to the capacity criteria described above, NASA developed a crosswalk to ensure the survey con-
tained a mix of questions that addressed required elements A-F in the Evidence Act. This process ensured
the survey was exhaustive of all information mandated by the legislation and of particular evidence-building
relevance to the Agency. The open-ended questions were generated to support requirements outlined in
M-19-23 and help NASA ascertain the level of appropriateness of the activities to:
Support agency needs;
Balance agency needs for learning and management, performance and strategic management, in-
teragency and private sector coordination, and oversight and accountability; and
Use appropriate methodologies.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
94
Questions also helped determine if the Agency has the capacity to:
Plan and implement evaluation activities, disseminate best practices and findings, and incorporate
employee views and feedback; and
Carry out capacity-building activities in order to use evaluation research and analysis approaches
and data in day-to-day operations.
Section 6: Independence
of
research
and
analysis
activities
Effectiveness
research
and
analysis
activities
research
and
analysis
activities
Activities
of
describing
making
data
of
one
or
efficiency
Evaluations
assess
hew
forma
including
process
formative
and
descriptive
studies.
activities
may
overlap
with
other
activities
(Le
statistics
and
purpose
Examples
may
include
butare not
limited
to
data,
or
research
and
development
activities
purposes
only
and ongoing statisties, evaluation research and analysis activities
meas
hereafter) that within your organization that are necessary to
profe
functions within your organization
or need for conducting these activities? Are they tied to any specific
please state those requirements
De the activities support the need of other divisions or organizations within NASA?
10
Arei
For ewample, the findinge from activities are beneficial establish guiding principles to other
Figure 1: Capacity Assessment Survey
Phase 2 of the survey consisted of an open-ended question that stated, "What type of information, data,
analysis, evaluation, and/or evidence is used to enable better decision making and/or policy making?" Recip-
ients had the opportunity to list and describe those activities. The figure below illustrates the commonalities
between the Phase 1 and 2 responses.
Phase 1:
Phase 2:
Responses from
Responses from
Practitioners
Org Leads and
Data Repository Collection
Workforce Analysis
Cost Estimating
Senior Leadership
Phasing Plan Development
Analyses
Technical and Test Data
Life Cycle/Mission Reviews
Schedule Estimating
Airworthiness/Flight- Safety
Analyses
Review Process
Performance and
Affordability and Credibility
Trend Analyses
Assessments
EVM Analyses
Federal Viewpoint Survey
Scenario Analyses
Mission Directorate Special
Risk Management
Studies
Model Optimization
Quantitative Risk
Resource Execution
Analysis
Workforce Strategy and
Planning
Budget Analysis
Figure 2: Capacity Assessment Phase 1 and Phase 2 Result Comparison
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
95
Capacity Assessment Criteria
Coverage
NASA has a robust internal and external evidence-building structure in place for its programs and mis-
sions, shown in the figure below. NASA's governing bodies, Mission Directorates, and Centers identify evi-
dence-building activities including statistics, evaluations, research, and analysis and maintain the tools and
expertise needed to produce evidence. The Agency is structured to include research-focused organizations
at NASA Headquarters, within Mission Directorates, at each of its Centers, and at the Federally Funded Re-
search and Development Center levels. Phase 1 of survey distribution covered Mission Directorate, Center,
and PP&C Community staff to properly capture a diverse subset of Agency staff and contractors across evi-
dence-building domains. Research at NASA can be conducted entirely by Agency staff, augmented through
contractor support, or through external research institutions and firms through a competitive Federal
awards process.
Headquarters
Industry
Mission Directorates
Universities
Centers
National Academies
FFRDCs
Citizen Science
Figure 3: NASA's Internal and External Evidence-building Sources
Both the Office of Strategic Engagement and Assessments and the Strategic Investments Division (SID) are
organizations within NASA that perform Agency-wide evidence activities. The Agency Investment Analysis
(AIA) office, within SID, functions as NASA's Statistical Unit to inform and advise NASA senior leadership on
Agency-wide investment decisions to ensure affordable and achievable long-term strategies are effective
and efficient for the Agency. The Branch Chief of AIA serves as NASA's Statistical Official to ensure alignment
between investments and evidence gathered for Agency strategy and resource allocation to enable in-
formed decision-making through assessments, trending, and forecasting of budgets, mission content, work-
force, mission performance, and other factors influencing the ability of NASA to achieve its mission. The
Agency also leverages academia, industry, and the National Academies to utilize all available expertise in the
aerospace community when conducting evidence-building activities. Citizen science projects also provide an
integral source of evidence and discovery through the Agency's open data portal. Policymakers at NASA can
request and access evidence from all these resources through various council and external body reviews.
The Agency maintains a highly-skilled workforce comprised of scientists, engineers, nuclear and chemical
engineers, and data and program analysts who have the expertise needed to conduct evidence-building
activities across the Enterprise. In addition to the Federal workforce, NASA utilizes contracts to leverage the
power and flexibility of academia and the private sector for additional insights into the Agency's missions.
The results from the survey illustrated that analysts and practitioners have adequate personnel to plan and
conduct evidence-building activities, and generally self-report high levels of full-time equivalent (FTE) and
work-year equivalent staff (WYE) staff necessary to carry out vital Agency evidence-building functions. The
future submissions of the Capacity Assessment will better highlight how the evidence-building activities sup-
port the development of skill sets to execute goals and objectives outlined in the Strategic Plan.
COVERAGE
Excellent
7%
Good
Fair
39%
54%
Figure 4: Agency Self Report of Coverage
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
96
Quality
NASA's evidence-building activities produce high-quality results due to its capable workforce, procedural re-
quirements, and rigorous peer review processes. NASA has a structure of internal policies that dictate thor-
ough research standards in line with the best standards and practices. The creation of NASA Policy Directive
(NPD) 1210, NASA's Evaluation Policy, ensures that all evaluations meet the quality of standards established
by the Evidence Act and the Federal evaluation community.
When NASA undertakes significant evidence-building activities for its programs and missions, a peer review
process is in place to ensure that rigorous standards and quality are upheld. NASA's organization and di-
verse talent pool allows the Agency to utilize peer reviews so that findings are clear and thorough before
results are disseminated to Agency leadership or the public.
The survey results indicate that Agency staff and contractors self-report high levels of quality necessary to
produce reliable and robust results within their community and incorporate high levels of rigor needed to
inform decision-making. Furthermore, respondents indicated in open responses that evidence-building
quality standards are often codified as part of a specific NASA policy, objective or program requirement, in-
cluding regular risk assessments and stipulations set forth in NASA Procedural Requirements and NPDs.
QUALITY
6%
Excellent
Good
Fair
24%
70%
Figure 5: Agency Self Report of Quality
Methods
As a world leader in aeronautics and space research, NASA is committed to using the right methodological
approach to accommodate various research designs and data types. In many cases, NASA Centers or Mis-
sion Directorates conducting the analyses are responsible for developing an approach or research model
that fits their needs and adopt evidence-based methodological approaches that produce verifiable findings.
Other research efforts are smaller in scope and may include a targeted statistical analysis of a program,
data set, or policy. Regardless of the research type or chosen methodology, NASA adheres to the highest
standards of rigor and quality.
Leveraging the Capacity Assessment to gather a diverse inventory of evidence-building types was important
to determine how NASA pairs these activities to specific methods and whether the Agency implements the
appropriate quantitative and qualitative methodological approaches, techniques and strategies to collect
and understand measurement data as part of each research design. Additionally, the survey sought invento-
ry methods from across NASA's Mission Directorates, Centers, and PP&C Community, and determines how a
methodological approach was decided.
The survey results indicate high levels of methodological appropriateness as self-reported, and that the
strategies to collect and understand measurement data are strong. Additionally, the survey uncovered the
myriad of historical approaches, industry standards (e.g., risk and schedule analysis, cost estimating, perfor-
mance analysis and standard accounting) and other assessment criteria used to select a prevailing method-
ological type, tied to inventory of methods gathered in the survey.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
97
METHODS
9%
Excellent
Good
Fair
28%
63%
Figure 6: Agency Self Report of Methods
Effectiveness
After the results from evidence-building activities have been internally reviewed, they are presented to one
of several NASA management councils, which together comprise the decisional and governing bodies across
the Agency. In addition to these governing bodies, a series of external councils and advisory groups play a
support role to help provide oversight of Agency management and operations. Together, these internal and
external councils, illustrated in the figure below, use these results to make better-informed policy decisions.
Agency Strategy
Legend
Agency Governance, Organization Roles
EC
Internal Council
Agency Budget
External Council
Stakeholder Management
Escalation and Reclama Path
Safety, Risks and
Agency-Wide Strategy
ASAP
NAC
Hazards in Aerospace
ASC
and Governance
Agency Future Work Planning
Specific Acquisition Strategy Approval
Acquisition Policy, Integration and
Performance
Partnerships
Strategic Make/Buy/Partner
Mission Support
Program and Project
Strategies and Structures
Implementation
Performance and
Programmatic, Technical
APMC
MSC
Improvement Initiatives
and Mission Capabilities
Threshold Operation
Risk Management, Risk
Acceptance, and Technical
OIG
Decisions
BPR
Risk, Internal Controls,
Authority
and Liability
Agency-Wide Programs
Performance vs Goals
and Operations
NASA's internal councils are led by the Executive Council (EC), which determines NASA's strategic direction
and assesses progress toward achieving the Agency's vision. The EC depends on valid and robust research
conducted across NASA's Centers and Mission Directorates to advise the Administrator. The Agency Pro-
gram Management Council (APMC) provides oversight concerning the integrated Agency mission portfolio
and uses performance reports and independent assessment models to ensure mission success and to
enhance management accountability. The Acquisition Strategy Council (ASC) serves as the Agency's senior
decision-making body regarding future work planning, specific acquisition strategy approval, and acquisition
policy integration and performance. The Baseline Performance Review (BPR) is conducted monthly by the
Associate Administrator and serves as a bottom-up review of how well the Agency is executing across per-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
98
formance metrics such as cost and schedule estimates, contract commitments, or technical objectives. The
Mission Support Council (MSC) determines and assesses mission support requirements to enable successful
accomplishment of the Agency's missions. To provide informed implementation strategies on vital support
functions such as facility and infrastructure requirements and workforce projections, the MSC is tasked with
evaluating research findings under the mission support portfolio to determine how efficiently funds are
allocated and to measure the outcomes from these investments. Together, these decisional bodies depend
upon and leverage NASA's vast evidence-building capacity and culture to make informed policy decisions
across management, strategic, and operational lines.
External councils and advisory groups also play a role in interpreting NASA-produced statistics, evaluation,
and research and analysis findings to assist senior officials in their governance capacity. The NASA Advisory
Council is a longstanding body of external experts that convenes to address topics relevant to the Agency
including human exploration, aeronautics, technology and innovation and uses NASA research to offer rec-
ommendations to the Administrator on the effectiveness of program safety and efficiency. The Aerospace
Safety Advisory Council (ASAP) submits an annual report to both the Administrator and Congress detailing
safety, risk and hazard data and findings across NASA's aerospace programs. Lastly, NASA's Office of the
Inspector General (OIG) independently reports to the Administrator, Congress, and the public. The OIG pro-
motes efficiency and effectiveness through audits, reviews, and investigations of NASA programs to detect
waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement.
Figure 7: NASA's Council System. Developed from NPD 1000.0C
The survey results indicate high levels of effectiveness in that policies and programs achieve their intended
program outcomes through efficient use of Agency resources. Furthermore, respondents indicated that
NASA's Management Councils, external councils, and array of advisory groups serve an important oversight
role to monitor Agency operations. Open-response survey answers indicated that most evidence-building
activities followed a tracking and monitoring process to assess program/project milestones and that findings
from these activities directly influence organizational planning and decision-making.
EFFECTIVENESS
6%
Excellent
Good
Fair
33%
61%
Figure 8: Agency Self-Report of Effectiveness
Independence
NASA has the capability to undertake its own research efforts but also takes great strides to ensure its find-
ings and methods are transparent, rigorous, and in-step with the broader scientific community and ethical
standards. NASA research undergoes an independent peer review for publication in professional journals,
and the Agency receives independent expert advice from the National Academies of Science, Engineering,
and Medicine, which guide planning and help ensure the Agency's research and development priorities align
with the needs of the larger exploration and science communities. The National Academies also lead a se-
ries of decadal surveys to help inform the balance of NASA portfolios while providing independent expert
advice on areas such as aerospace technologies, space biology, and physics.
In addition to interagency outreach and consultation with the academic community, NASA also ensures re-
search and program testing undergoes independent and impartial assessments when conducted within the
Agency. Standing Review Boards (SRBs) are formal assessments across the lifecycle of a program or project
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
99
to provide an objective review of design and development plans using staff outside of the programmatic or
institutional authorities related to the program or project in question. SRBs also help keep applied research
plans on track and help demonstrate to senior leadership that projects are ripe for a new stage of testing,
while removing the pressures of self-imposed deadlines to push forward a project without the evidence to
support its approval.
The survey results indicate that NASA teams and organizations self-report that evidence-building activities
are undertaken impartially and free from undue influence. Agency staff and contractors submit that activi-
ties across each domain uphold rigorous, ethical, and transparent research practices to ensure findings are
externally valid and credible.
INDEPENDENCE
4%
Excellent
26%
Good
Fair
70%
Figure 9: Agency Self Report of Independence
NASA's Capacity for Evidence-Building Activities
The survey was distributed via email to the survey participants in Spring 2021 and a total of 47 responses
were received with representation of 10 organizations. With the Likert scale establishing the standard to-
wards assessing aspects of the identified activities, the level of detail provided with the open-ended ques-
tions was mixed.
Survey responses were reviewed to determine whether the activity could be either evaluation, statistics,
and/or research and analysis. The definitions used were:
Statistics: Collection, compilation, processing, or analysis of data for the purpose of describing or
making estimates about the whole vs. an individual.
Evaluation: an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of one or more programs,
policies, and organizations intended to assess their effectiveness and efficiency. Evaluations assess
how well a program is working and can take several forms including process evaluations, formative
evaluations, outcome/impact evaluations and descriptive studies.
Research and analysis: Research and analysis activities may overlap with other activities (i.e., statis-
tics and evaluation) depending on methods and purpose. Examples may include, but are not limited
to foundational fact finding, policy analysis using data, or research and development activities.
There was some overlap in the placement of the activities, however, the results illustrated that the majority
of NASA's evidence-building types are considered statistics.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
100
Evidence Building Types
Statistics
Evaluation
Research and Analysis
32%
37%
31%
Figure 10: Agency's Evidence-Building Types
Evidence-Building Activities Identified
It was apparent that the Agency conducts similar analyses within the Mission Directorates and at the Cen-
ters to better inform policies and aid in decision-making. The raw data from the survey was summarized at a
high level to eliminate redundancy. The sections below provide further context on how NASA interprets sta-
tistics, evaluation, and research/analysis activities. Additionally, as required by A-11, these specific activities
are identified and defined in terms of their use at NASA.
At NASA, statistical activities are comprised of collecting data from historical programs, projects, and pro-
cesses to help determine how future programs/projects should function to achieve mission success. These
statistical activities include looking at the range of data, identifying outliers and the circumstances as to why
outliers exist. These analyses help determine Agency thresholds for cost and schedule estimates, determine
acquisition requirements, and shape performance metrics. Centers also conduct strategic workforce anal-
ysis and financial assessments to ascertain whether there are sufficient resources to support a portfolio of
programs and projects and/or Center needs Activities include:
Cost Estimating and Analyses
Estimating and analysis activities including but not limited to creating cost models to estimate
program, project, or directorate costs based on cost estimating relationships, analogous pro-
gram/project data, and/or historical NASA data.
Schedule Estimating and Analyses
Collecting historical NASA schedules to identify how to better estimate durations of future pro-
grams and projects.
Data Repository Collection
Maintaining and collecting program and project cost, schedule, risk, and earned value manage-
ment data to provide insight in the historical trends of the Agency.
Workforce Analysis
Collecting historical data on the hiring and attrition of employees; conducting analyses on
whether workforce needs are met
Phasing Plan Development
Collecting historical program and project information to inform how to properly phase spend
plans for successful execution of funds
Performance and Trend Analysis
Determining if the program and/or project is executing within acceptable threshold levels
based on collected programmatic data. Threshold levels are set from cost and schedule analy-
ses
Budget Analysis
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
101
Collecting budget data to define and establish budget requirements, controls, and guidelines
to support agency priorities and strategies.
NASA Evaluation evidence-building types include assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of a Program,
project and/or process. NASA conducts Lifecycle Reviews (LCRs) for key mission milestones or decision
points. To support the LCR, the feasibility of the cost and schedule estimates are evaluated.
Activities include:
Cost Estimating and Analyses
Conducting cost analyses to determine how well the program and project is executing their
cost plan
Schedule Estimating and Analysis
Conducting schedule risk analyses to determine how well the project is managing margin with-
in acceptable threshold limits
Risk Management and Quantitate Risk Analysis
Assessing possible impacts and outcomes of threats to program and project goals and objec-
tives to help determine other areas of concern and be more reactive to perceived threats.
Life Cycle and Agency Reviews
Determining if the program and/or project meets the intended objectives and executing within
the pre-determined guidelines
Earned Value Analyses
Conducting an integrated view of cost and schedule analyses to determine if the program and
project is executing well within the pre-determined guidelines
Airworthiness and Flight Safety Review
Conducting a process evaluation to determine if a project's team plans and hazard stance
meets the requirements for aircraft operations.
Affordability and Credibility Assessments
Conducting analysis to determine if a process or evaluation is useful to the agency's needs
NASA conducts various research and analysis activities to inform estimates, perfect model development,
understand the possible impacts of varying scenarios, and provide context on newly-developed technol-
ogies/demonstrations. These types of activities provide foundational fact-finding towards executing evi-
dence-building analysis. Once the Agency understands the context of the potential risk and/or question,
action plans will be devised to address the gap and eliminate negative impacts. Activities include:
Mission Directorate Special Studies
Performing various analyses and research to help determine why systematic issues may occur
Scenario Analyses
Conducting research on several options to determine the most optimal alternative to identi-
fied problems within programs or projects.
Risk Management and Quantitate Risk Analysis
Assessing possible impacts and outcomes of threats to program and project goals and objec-
tives to help determine other areas of concern and be more reactive to perceived threats.
Workforce Strategy and Planning
Using the historical workforce data, conducting analyses to determine how to optimize the cur-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
102
rent and future workforce
Federal Viewpoint Survey
Consists of collecting data for the Federal Viewpoint Surveys and assessing improvements and
degradation in employee morale.
Resource Execution
Developing a plan for managing, analyzing, and reporting performance of resources based on
researched and collected data
Model Optimization
Improvement of program and project models by researching other possible methodological
approaches and updating the models based on most recent collected data.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
103
Findings
Table 2 below summarizes assessment of each domain against coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness,
and independence as required by A-11 (Requirements B-F). A list of the activities and operations, as re-
quired by Requirement A, were defined in the previous section.
Research and
Requirements B-F
Statistics
Evaluation
Analysis
Supports Agency Needs
Activities support Agen-
Identified activities sup-
Agency needs are sup-
cy's needs in terms of
port Agency needs and
ported with the improve-
data collection for de-
align to agency policy and
ment of methods, tools,
velopment of models
requirements
and practices that are
and thresholds, forecast
Most of the capability
used for some evaluation
performance. Many anal-
resides with the Office of
activities
ysis activities support ad-
the Chief Financial Officer
Research and analysis
herence to NASA policy
(OCFO), Strategic Devel-
efforts address imme-
requirements. Strategic
opment divisions within
diate 'what if' scenarios
analysis also ensures
Centers, with some ac-
of major Programs and
alignment Strategic Plan
tivities in the Office of
projects
Survey responses indi-
Human Capital
Capability of conducting
cate there are adequate
Provide stakeholders
analyses are distributed
personnel support to
with insight into perfor-
across the Centers and
execute the identified
mance of programs and
Mission Directorates
activities, including for
their purpose. Successful
backfilling positions due
execution of Programs/
to planned retirements
projects within Mission
Activities are conducted
Directorates' support
across the Centers and
NASA's Strategic Plan and
Missions Directorates
Objectives
Survey responses indi-
cate there are adequate
personnel support to
execute the identified
activities
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
104
Research and
Requirements B-F
Statistics
Evaluation
Analysis
Balancing Agency needs
Formal and informal
Professional develop-
Primarily informal train-
for learning and man-
training mechanisms are
ment opportunities
ing mechanisms are in
agement, performance
in place to help ensure
exist within NASA that
place (e.g., mentoring,
and strategic manage-
that the personnel can
are specific to the Eval-
on the job training, etc.,)
ment, interagency and
execute activities based
uation activities (e.g.,
to conduct research and
private sector coordina-
on established quality
PP&C Training Curric-
analysis efforts
tion, and oversight and
standards
ulum Enhancements).
An overarching question
accountability
The civil servant and
Formal training on how
concerning flagship pro-
contractor workforce col-
to conduct the identified
grams
laborate well to ensure
evaluation activities can
There is support from the
mission success. SOWs
accessed through learn-
Enterprise perspective,
clearly identify what type
ing management systems
however most research
of support is needed
such as the Systems for
and analyses activities
from the contracting
Administration, Training,
are germane to the
workforce
and Educational Resourc-
civil servant workforce.
Oversight into these ac-
es and the Chief Financial
Coordination from the
tivities are blurred across
Officer University
contracting workforce is
domains of Centers/Mis-
The contractors and oth-
limited due to potential
sion Directorates. Some
er partners work along-
conflict of interest
may reside within specific
side the civil servant
Some Research and
Programs and projects,
workforce to ensure that
Analysis activities are
while others may be from
these activities are being
organized based on
an enterprise perspective
conducted when request-
specific need to address
Statistical analyses help
ed and needed
an overarching question
establish performance
The OCFO SID has stew-
for flagship programs.
thresholds and provides
ardship over the cost,
Centers and Mission Di-
guidance to decision
schedule and earned
rectorates are strategic in
makers when a Program
value management func-
devising a plan to meet
or project is executing
tions within the Agency.
the new (e.g., special
efficiently and meeting
These functions support
study teams), as they
objectives.
multiple evaluations
will oversight over those
within NASA. The policies,
activities
methods, and processes
Other Research & Anal-
are consistent and can
ysis activities include
be tailorable to meet the
performing analyses to
needs of specific evalu-
improve upon models
ations
and tools. Oversight into
model improvement is
led by the OCFO
Use of appropriate
The application of methods and tools does vary with activities. However, methods do
methods
reflect of best historical approaches, along with industry and Agency best practices
and guidelines
Analysts do benchmark methods against other agencies and capture lessons learned.
Analysts network across directorates and Centers to help ensure appropriate use
of methods for assessments and/or evaluations. Methodologies are supported by
Agency policies and improved upon by historical data and research
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
105
Research and
Requirements B-F
Statistics
Evaluation
Analysis
Planning and imple-
Results from analyses do
Results for Evaluation
Results from Research
menting evaluation
drive how Program and
activities provide insight
and Analysis activities
activities, disseminating
projects plan and exe-
into performance of the
can directly influence the
best practices and find-
cute. For example, some
Program to assess if the
how senior leadership
ings, and incorporating
of the cost and schedule
processes in place are
engages and supports
employee views and
analysis activities estab-
effective and efficient
employees. For example,
feedback
lished Agency best prac-
When variances arise,
the View Point Survey
tices that are outlined
corrective actions are
allowed NASA to pinpoint
in governing policy and
identified, evaluated and
the concerns of employ-
handbook documents
adhered to, where neces-
ees and devise an ap-
Results of the activities
sary, to minimize risk and
proach to address their
meets the needs of
ensure mission success
needs
stakeholders
Analysis results have
Collecting trends, past
improved tool develop-
historical performances,
ment to support cost and
and lessons learned en-
schedule estimates
ables the Agency to iden-
tify past challenges and
know how to better re-
spond to them in the fu-
ture. These are incorpo-
rated by how Programs
and project execute their
processes and plans
Carrying out capaci-
The capability to conduct evidence-building activities exists across the Centers and
ty-building activities in
Mission Directorates. Sufficient data and resources are in place to conduct analysis of
order to use evaluation
alternative and de-scope activities to ensure the successful execution of mission ob-
research and analysis
jectives without sacrificing technical and safety protocols
approaches and data in
NASA's Lifecycle Review process and Council System serves as a means to notify
the day-to-day opera-
stakeholders on the effectiveness of analysis and if additional action is warranted
tions
Table 1: Survey Results vs. Capacity Assessment Guidance
Gap Analysis
Although NASA Mission Directorates, Centers, and PP&C staff self-assess these evidence-building types from
fair to excellent across each capacity criteria along the Likert scale, gaps still exist in the evaluation process.
Identifying these gaps is a necessary step toward informing Agency decision-makers about the current state
of capacity, and where programs and processes could be improved.
Early in the Capacity Assessment process, it became clear that Evidence Act implementation was heavily
concentrated within Agency OCFO functions in terms of staff and contractor resources. In order to properly
diffuse these capabilities, NASA's Evaluation Officer endeavored to broaden participation across the Agency
by taking an enterprise approach. This led to the launch of the Evaluation Management Process Champion
Working Group, comprised of members from across NASA's Mission Directorates, Centers, and PP&C Com-
munity to directly report ongoing evidence-building activities within their organization or Center. This team
was instrumental in identifying the appropriate working mix of survey respondents, and going forward,
will be vital to execute an evaluation enterprise strategy, integrated and informed by the OCFO Leadership
team. This will ensure the Agency is taking steps to increase visibility and participation of evidence-building
functions beyond Headquarters and into all areas of NASA.
One drawback of using a survey, is that the timing of the survey can affect the responses received. Some
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
106
of our respondents perform a relatively steady level of evidence-building activities throughout the years.
However, many others experience peaks and valleys. This is similar to OMB or Agency Budget offices, who
usually commit longer hours when budgets are being determined. These peaks in workload and require-
ments can increase even higher during Presidential administrative changes, as new focuses and initiatives
are established. Therefore, it is imperative that we identify a mitigation strategy for this to negate any timing
issues during the assessment of our evaluator's capabilities to perform analysis, especially related to cover-
age.
Capacity Assessment Path Forward
With the inaugural submission of the NASA Capacity Assessment, a basis has been established on how to
continuously improve upon capturing and understanding evidence-building activities within the Agency. Ad-
mittedly, as with any new endeavor, this initial assessment involved a learning curve and an understanding
of how to collect and assess evidence-building data effectively and efficiently. This first submission can be
considered a gateway to understanding the Agency's disconnects and gaps in terms of evidence-building.
Ideally, with each subsequent Capacity Assessment submission, NASA will improve by better characterizing
evidence-building activities and addressing how they impact policy and decision making. Ideally, the pre-
ferred future state of our Capacity Assessment would include:
Further defining and categorizing evidence-building activities, more clearly;
Expanding the scope from which data is collected;
Streamlining how data is collected and assessed, utilizing support from process champion working
groups from across the Agency;
Achieving further alignment of evidence-building activities to support the execution of goals and ob-
jectives outlined in the Strategic Plan, Equity Action Plan, and other Agency initiatives;
Reviewing technology capabilities more in-depth to determine opportunities to improve data gath-
ering and data analytics; and
Achieving further engagement with external stakeholders (i.e. colleges, universities, small business-
es, industry partners, NASA Advisory Council).
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
107
Appendix C: Developing and
Implementing NASA's Strategy
The 2022 Strategic Plan establishes NASA's framework of Strategic Goals and Objectives, which align with
and support our Vision and Mission. The Strategic Plan reflects national policies and legislation, as well as
the strategic direction set by the NASA Administrator. The strategic planning process included internal stake-
holders from across the Agency and critical external stakeholders, including the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) and Congress.
NASA's strategic planning process began in September 2020 with executive-level guidance discussions. A
Strategic Plan Working Group (SPWG) was charged with developing a new Strategic Plan built on this guid-
ance. The SPWG was comprised of a core group of internal stakeholders representing our Mission Director-
ates, Centers, Office of STEM Engagement, and Office of Communications. It also included extended adviso-
ry members responsible for implementing the Strategic Plan in the areas of the Government Performance
and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA); the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
of 2018 (Evidence Act); enterprise risk management (ERM); planning, programming, budgeting, and execu-
tion (PPBE); and other areas. The Strategic Plan development process was co-led by a Senior Policy Advisor
in the Office of the Administrator, and the Chief for the Strategic Planning, Performance Management, and
Reporting Branch within the Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
The leads for the SPWG held regular informational and course-correction discussions with the NASA Ad-
ministrator and other senior leaders throughout the development of the Strategic Plan. NASA's Executive
Council, the governing council responsible for Agency-wide strategy, reviewed and approved the Strategic
Planning framework at several formal touchpoints. Working with OMB, the SPWG refined content to ensure
the Strategic Plan is consistent with national policy, sets an ambitious and lasting strategic direction for our
ongoing activities, and builds a solid framework for implementation.
NASA's ability to deliver on the Strategic Goals and Objectives outlined in the Strategic Plan relies on a long-
term strategic planning process that is ongoing and iterative, allowing for flexibility to respond to dynamic
internal and external environments. We strive to be proactive in our strategy, reflecting the Agency's com-
mitment to continued leadership in space exploration, development of new technologies, innovation, and
scientific discovery. The NASA Administrator uses several formal internal mechanisms to ensure that Agency
efforts align with our Strategic Plan and to identify potential changes in strategy:
The Associate Administrator for Technology, Policy, and Strategy develops Agency-level strategy in
consultation with internal and external stakeholders and works with senior leadership to implement
it across the Agency, providing strategic alignment of mission areas.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) manages all external GPRAMA and Evidence Act re-
porting and is the compliance organization for the Strategic Plan. As a non-aligned organization, the
OCFO provides independent guidance and support to the SPWG and senior leadership.
The Executive Council, a forum comprised of senior leaders at NASA Headquarters, advises on
high-level NASA strategy and reviews products that inform and/or are informed by the NASA Strate-
gic Plan, such as our annual budget, Agency communication plan, and workforce decisions.
The annual PPBE process uses long-term strategic planning as the basis for prioritizing our pro-
grammatic and institutional needs, as well as identifying potential Agency challenges and risks that
could be potential barriers to success.
The Strategic Review annually assesses whether NASA's programs and projects are successfully exe-
cuting the strategy described for each Strategic Objective. The Strategic Review examines successes,
risks, resources, and other areas that can impact implementation.
The Annual Performance Plan provides the Performance Goals and Agency Priority Goals used to
assess NASA's annual progress toward achieving the activities supporting each Strategic Objective.
The Performance Goals and their annual targets are consistent with NASA's fiscal year budget re-
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
108
quest. The annual results are incorporated into the Strategic Review.
The Chief Operating Officer (COO), as well as other NASA senior staff, review Agency performance at
a monthly data-driven Baseline Performance Review.
Evaluations conducted through the Evidence Act seek to address Agency-leve issues. Results to
evaluations (identified in the Learning Agenda) may influence how we implement strategy-or guide
new strategy.
The Mission Directorates and Centers incorporate our Agency-level strategy into their implementation plans
to ensure we are all supporting the Vision and Mission. NASA holds its leadership fully accountable for meet-
ing near-term performance standards and Performance Goals, as well as progress toward long-term Stra-
tegic Objectives. Program authorities and the Agency governance councils hold regular internal reviews to
monitor and evaluate performance and use the results to support internal management processes and de-
cision making. The COO is responsible for reviewing progress toward Agency program and project plans and
addresses cross-cutting concerns that may impact mission performance against approved plans. Decisions
are informed by leveraging evidence, evaluations, studies, and independent analysis to identify challenges,
risks, and opportunities to ensure mission success.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
109
Appendix D: Performance Goals,
FY 2022-2023 Agency Priority
Goals, and Cross-Agency Priority
Goals
Performance Goals
NASA's multiyear Performance Goals align with and contribute to Strategic Objectives in the 2022 Strategic
Plan. Each Performance Goal includes annual targets that reflect program and project budget. For a com-
plete list of NASA's Performance Goals, please see the FY 2023 Agency Performance Plan, which will be pub-
lished, in accordance with Office of Management and Budget guidelines, in the FY 2023 Volume of Integrated
Performance.
Agency Priority Goals (APGs)
NASA's FY 2022-2023 APGs are a subset of high-profile Performance Goals that have been selected for ad-
ditional internal and external performance reporting. APGs reflect the top NASA and national performance
priorities. The APGs are executed within a two-year timeframe, and therefore, do not reflect the full scope of
the program or project. More information on APGs is available on http://www.performance.gov.
Climate Change Research (Strategic Objective 1.1)
Use the global vantage point of space to advance our understanding of the Earth system, its processes, and
changing climate. By September 2023, NASA will advance climate change research by delivering two new observ-
ing systems and an upgrade to NASA's primary global Earth systems model.
James Webb Space Telescope (Strategic Objective 1.2)
After launch, deployment, and start of science operations, the James Webb Space Telescope will study every
phase in the history of our universe, ranging from the first luminous glows after the Big Bang, to the for-
mation of other stellar systems capable of supporting life on planets like Earth, to the evolution of our own
solar system. By September 30, 2023, NASA will complete commissioning of the James Webb Space Telescope, the
most powerful and complex space telescope ever built, and begin Webb's Cycle 2 observations.
Artemis (Strategic Objective 2.1)
Advance America's goal to land the first woman and the first person of color on the Moon and pursue a sus-
tainable program of exploration by demonstrating capabilities that advance lunar exploration. By September
30, 2023, NASA will launch Artemis I, deliver the Core Stage for Artemis Il to Kennedy Space Center for processing,
and have multiple companies under contract to develop systems for sustainable human lunar exploration.
Space Technology Leadership (Strategic Objective 3.1)
Ensure American global leadership in space technology innovations through increased partnering with in-
dustry and demonstrating key lunar surface and deep space technologies. By September 30, 2023: NASA will
demonstrate leadership in space technology by:
Enhancing partnerships with industry through delivery or completion of milestones for at least 4 Tipping
Point opportunities, and at least 3 critical small business technology transitions to develop capabilities
that support NASA and commercial needs;
Delivering at least 3 new technologies that will be demonstrated on the lunar surface or in lunar orbit;
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
110
and
Completing at least 2 major milestones for projects that increase the nation's capabilities in deep space.
Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goals
CAP Goals are intended to accelerate progress on management priorities identified in the President's Man-
agement Agenda. The Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA)
requires agencies to address CAP Goals in their Strategic Plans, Annual Performance Plans, and Annual
Performance Reports. Please refer to http://www.performance.gov for more information on the President's
Management Agenda and the CAP Goals, including progress updates and NASA's contributions to the goals,
where applicable.
To ensure effective leadership and accountability across the Federal Government, each CAP Goal typically
has a named senior leader within the Executive Office of the President and another within one or more of
the key delivery agencies. NASA is not a goal leader for any of the CAP Goals but does support CAP Goal im-
plementation. NASA will provide additional information on its specific contributions to the CAP Goals, where
appropriate, in its annual Volume of Integrated Performance.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
111
Appendix E: Relevant Legislation
and Executive Orders
Overview
The following pages contain two tables of Executive Orders (EOs) and a mapping of these orders to the Stra-
tegic Objectives. The first table focuses on Workforce EOs and the second focuses on STEM and climate sci-
ence. The tables are provided on separate pages and in landscape format in order to maximize readability.
The full text of each EO can be found online at https://www.Federalregister.gov/presidential-documents
executive-orders/joe-biden/2021.
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
112
EO 13985
EO 13988
EO 14020
EO 14031
EO 14035
EO 14041
EO 14045
EO 14049
EO 14050
Racial Equity
Gender
Gender Policy
Equity AAPI
DEIA in the
Equity HBCUs
Equity Hispanic
Equity Native
Equity Black
WORKFORCE EOs
Identity/Sexual
Council
and Native
Federal
Americans
Americans
Americans
Orientation
Hawaiians
Workforce
SG1 DISCOVER
SO1.1 Earth and climate
o
o
o
o
o
o
O
SO1.2 Solar system, universe
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
o
O
SO1.3 Data accessibility
X
o
o
L
o
L
L
L
L
SG2 EXPLORE
SO2.1 Moon and deep space
o
o
o
o
SO2.2 Space economy
SO2.3 Safety
SO2.4 Access and services
SG3 INNOVATE
SO3.1 Advanced technology
X
O
X
SO3.2 Sustainable aviation
o
o
o
SG4 ADVANCE
SO4.1 Workforce
o
O
O
SO4.2 Mission support
O
SO4.3 Next gen explorers
O
o
O
o
o
o
o
o
KEY
X
L
BLANK BOXES
ALIGNS WITH EO OR MENTIONS "EO," BUT
POTENTIAL LIMITED APPLICABILITY WITH
EO NAME AND NUMBER ARE MENTIONED
NO IDENTIFIED APPLICABILITY WITH EO
NOT SPECIFIC EO NAME or NUMBER
EO IF CONTENT IS ADDED
EO 13990
EO 14005
EO 14007
EO 14008
EO 14013
EO 14017
EO 14027
EO 14028
EO 14030
EO 14034
EO 14057
Public Health
American
Science and
Climate
Climate
Supply
Climate
Cyber-
Climate
Data
Clean
STEM EOs
and Climate
Manu-
Technology
Crisis
Refugees
Chains
Change
security
Financial
Protection
Energy
facturing
Council
Support
Risk
Office
SG1 DISCOVER
SO1.1 Earth and climate
L
o
L
L
SO1.2 Solar system, universe
L
O
L
L
SO1.3 Data accessibility
L
O
X
O
L
L
SG2 EXPLORE
SO2.1 Moon and deep space
L
L
L
L
SO2.2 Space economy
L
L
L
L
SO2.3 Safety
L
L
L
L
SO2.4 Access and services
L
L
L
L
SG3 INNOVATE
SO3.1 Advanced technology
O
L
X
L
O
L
L
L
L
SO3.2 Sustainable aviation
o
L
o
L
o
L
L
L
L
SG4 ADVANCE
SO4.1 Workforce
L
L
L
L
L
L
SO4.2 Mission support
L
L
L
O
L
L
L
L
L
L
SO4.3 Next gen explorers
L
o
L
L
L
L
KEY
X
L
BLANK BOXES
ALIGNS WITH EO OR MENTIONS "EO," BUT
POTENTIAL LIMITED APPLICABILITY WITH
EO NAME AND NUMBER ARE MENTIONED
NO IDENTIFIED APPLICABILITY WITH EO
NOT SPECIFIC EO NAME OR NUMBER
EO IF CONTENT IS ADDED
Appendix F: Acronym List
Acronym
Definition
AAPISI
Asian American and Pacific Islander Serving Institutions
AEP
Annual Evaluation Plan
AFRC
Armstrong Flight Research Center, Edwards, CA
Al
Artificial Intelligence
AIA
Agency Investment Analysis
APG
Agency Priority Goals
APMC
Agency Program Management Council
ARC
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA
ARF
Agency Resiliency Framework
ARMD
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate
ASAP
Aerospace Safety Advisory Council
ASC
Acquisition Strategy Council
ASL
Autonomous Systems Lab
BPR
Baseline Performance Review
BPS
Biological and Physical Sciences
CAP
Cross-Agency Priority
CIF
Center Innovation Fund
CLPS
Commercial Lunar Payload Services
CoF
Construction of Facilities
COMM-LEO
Commercial Low Earth Orbit
COO
Chief Operating Officer
CSA
Canadian Space Agency
DAPR
Dual-anonymous Peer Review Process
DEIA
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility
EC
Executive Council
EDL
Entry, Descent, and Landing
EDP
Enterprise Data Platform
EGS
Exploration Ground Systems
EO
Executive Order
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
ESA
European Space Agency
ESDMD
Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate
ESIP
Early-Stage Innovation and Partnerships
EVA
Extravehicular Activities
FAR
Federal Acquisition Regulation
FFRDC
Federally Funded Research and Development Center
FY
Fiscal Year
GCD
Game Changing Development
GPRAMA
Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010
GRC
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
GSA
General Services Administration
GSFC
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
115
Acronym
Definition
HBCU
Historically Black Colleges and Universities
HLS
Human Landing System
HUBZone
Historically Underutilized Business Zone
ISS
International Space Station
IT
Information Technology
IXPE
Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer
JAXA
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
JPL
Jet Propulsion Lab, Pasadena, CA
JSC
Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX
KSC
Kennedy Space Center, Titusville, FL
LCR
Lifecycle Review
LEO
Low Earth Orbit
LOFTID
Low-Earth Orbit Flight Test of an Inflatable Decelerator
LSP
Launch Services Program
LT
Long-term
MACC
Multiple Award Construction Contract
MOXIE
Mars Oxygen In-Situ Resource Utilization Experiment
MSC
Mission Support Council
MSD
Mission Support Directorate
MSFC
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL
MSI
Minority Serving Institutions
MUREP
Minority University Research and Education Project
NAC
NASA Advisory Council
NARI
NASA Aeronautics Research Institute
NAS
National Airspace System
NextSTEP
Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NPD
NASA Policy Directive
NVDB
NASA Vendor Database
OCFO
Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO
Office of the Chief Information Officer
OIG
Office of the Inspector General
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
OP
Office of Procurement
OSBP
Office of Small Business Programs
OSTEM
Office of STEM Engagement
PP&C
Program Planning and Control
PPBE
Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution
PQ
Priority Question
ROSES
Research Opportunities in Space and Earth Science
RPT
Rocket and Propulsion Test
SBA
Small Business Administration
SBIR
Small Business Innovation Research
SID
Strategic Investments Division
SLS
Space Launch System
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
116
Acronym
Definition
SMD
Science Mission Directorate
SO
Strategic Objective
SOMD
Space Operations Mission Directorate
SPWG
Strategic Plan Working Group
SRB
Standing Review Board
SSC
Stennis Space Center, Kiln, MS
SST
Small Spacecraft Technology
ST
Short-term
STEM
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
STMD
Space Technology Mission Directorate
STPI
Science and Technology Policy Institute
STTR
Small Business Technology Transfer
TDM
Technology Demonstration Missions
ULA
United Launch Alliance
ULI
University Leadership Initiative
U.S.
United States
USGS
United States Geological Survey
VERITAS
Venus Emissivity, Radio Science, InSAR, Topography, and Spectroscopy
WATSON
Wide Angle Topographic Sensor for Operations and eNgineering
NASA 2022 Strategic Plan
117
