National Aeronautics and Space Administration
FY 2023
Volume of
NASA
Integrated Performance
FY 2021 Annual Performance Report
FY 2022 Agency Performance Plan Update
FY 2023 Agency Performance Plan
www.nasa.gov
Table of Contents
NASA
Table of Contents
Part 1: Performance Management at NASA.
6
NASA Performance Foundations
7
Strategic Plan Framework.
9
Performance Management in Action
12
Performance Management Goals and Mandates
14
Oversight and Accountability
15
Strategies for Improvement
18
High Risk Areas Identified by the GAO
18
Management Challenges Identified by the OIG
20
Organized for Success and Sustainability
27
Above: NASA Communications' Jasmine Hopkins moderates a CRS-21 prelaunch news conference at Kennedy Space Center in Florida on December 4, 2020.
Participants included Kenny Todd, deputy program manager, International Space Station Program Office; Kirt Costello, chief scientist, International Space Station
Program Office; Sarah Walker, director, Dragon Mission Management, SpaceX; and Melody Lovin, launch weather officer, U.S. Air Force 45th Space Wing. SpaceX's
Falcon 9 rocket, with the upgraded version of the Cargo Dragon spacecraft atop, launched on December 6, 2020, from Kennedy's Launch Complex. It delivered
supplies, equipment, and critical materials needed to support a variety of science and research investigations on the International Space Station. Image credit: NASA/
Isaac Watson
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
2
Table of Contents
Part 2: Performance Planning and Reporting
30
[Discover] Strategic Goal 1: Expand human knowledge through new
scientific discoveries
32
Strategic Objective 1.1: Understand the Earth system and its climate.
33
Strategic Objective 1.2: Understand the Sun, solar system, and universe
41
Strategic Objective 1.3: Ensure NASA's science data are accessible
to all and produce practical benefits to society
59
[Explore] Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the Moon and
on towards Mars for Sustainable Long-term Exploration, Development,
and Utilization.
63
Strategic Objective 2.1: Explore the surface of the Moon and deep space
64
Strategic Objective 2.2: Develop a human spaceflight economy
enabled by a commercial market.
68
Strategic Objective 2.3: Develop capabilities and perform research
to safeguard explorers
75
Strategic Objective 2.4: Enable space access and services
78
[Innovate] Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze economic growth and drive
innovation to address national challenges
83
Strategic Objective 3.1: Innovate and advance transformational
space technologies.
84
Strategic Objective 3.2: Drive efficient and sustainable aviation.
95
[Advance] Strategic Goal 4: Enhance capabilities and operations to
catalyze current and future mission success
105
Strategic Objective 4.1: Attract and develop a talented and diverse workforce
106
Strategic Objective 4.2: Transform mission support capabilities for the
next era of aerospace
113
Strategic Objective 4.3: Build the next generation of explorers.
125
Appendixes.
132
Appendix A: FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
133
Appendix B: FY 2021 Summary of Progress by Strategic Objective
142
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
iii
Part' 1
Performance Management at
NASA
Above: After a 5,800-mile move, the James Webb Space Telescope has safely made it inside the cleanroom at its launch site at Guiana Space Center, in
French Guiana. After its arrival, Webb was carefully lifted from its packing container and then raised vertical. This is the same configuration Webb was in
when it launched on board an Ariane 5 rocket on December 25, 2021. Image credit: NASA/Chris Gunn
NASA Performance Foundations
NASA Performance Foundations
Vision
Exploring the secrets of the universe
for the benefit of all.
Mission
NASA explores the unknown in air and space,
innovates for the benefit of humanity, and
inspires the world through discovery.
Since 1958, NASA has led the peaceful exploration of space, advancing knowledge of Earth while making
discoveries about the furthest reaches of the universe. NASA research has advanced aeronautics, helped
develop the commercial space industry, and strengthened the U.S. economy. Our efforts in space help to
further the national economy, including through innovative commercial partnerships with American busi-
nesses. With the increasing threat of climate change, NASA's efforts to study and understand the Earth sys-
tem are of critical global significance. In addition, NASA's partnerships with academic institutions support a
robust science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce and promote diversity, equity,
and inclusion in the fields of science and technology.
NASA's long-term success will be largely determined by the strategic decisions and investments we make
today, as well as constant adherence to our five guiding Core Values.
Above: NASA astronaut and Expedition 64 Flight Engineer Kate Rubins removes research hardware from inside the Combustion Integrated Rack. She was
replacing gear to support a suite of fuel efficiency, pollution, and fire safety studies known as the Advanced Combustion in Microgravity Experiments, or
ACME. Image Credit: NASA
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
7
NASA Performance Foundations
NASA's Core Values
NASA's existing Core Values of Safety, Integrity, Inclusion, Teamwork, and Excellence
mandate individual and organizational behavior across the Agency at all levels:
Safety
Integrity
NASA's constant attention to safety
NASA is committed to maintaining
is the cornerstone upon which we
an environment of trust, built upon
build mission success.
honesty, ethical behavior, respect,
and candor.
Inclusion
Teamwork
NASA is committed to a culture
NASA's most powerful asset for
of diversity, inclusion, and equity,
achieving missión success is a multi-
where all employees feel welcome,
disciplinary team of diverse, talented
respected, and engaged.
people across all NASA Centers.
Excellence
To achieve the highest standards in engineering, research,
operations, and management in support of mission success, NASA
is committed to nurturing an organizational culture in which
individuals make full use of their time, talent, and opportunities
to pursue excellence in conducting all Agency efforts.
The Agency's success also is supported by continu-
Agency operations and provides a clear and uni-
ously evolving and strengthening our performance
fied direction for our programs and projects. This
management. We use common business and devel-
direction is captured in NASA's Vision and Mission
opment practices to proactively establish expecta-
statements-why NASA exists, what we aspire to
tions and assess and improve performance on an
achieve, and how we expect to achieve societal
ongoing basis. We use data and evidence to inform
benefits.
investment decisions at all levels, from day-to-day
operations to selecting major missions and estab-
The information reported in this document is
lishing the necessary infrastructure to pursue goals
aligned with the NASA 2022 Strategic Plan and the
that may take a generation or longer to realize.
FY 2023 Congressional Justification, in accordance
with the requirements of the GPRA Modernization
NASA is transparent in these efforts, complying
Act, as described below.
fully with requirements on performance report-
ing and accountability, in accordance with the
 trategic-Performance-Evidence
Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA)
Modernization Act of 2010. NASA's commitment
Framework
to performance reaches further than compliance.
The quadrennial NASA 2022 Strategic Plan describes
We have an ingrained culture of self-evaluation
a framework that consists of Strategic Goals
and continuous improvement, using findings from
aligned to our Mission; Strategic Objectives describ-
studies and assessments to improve the Agency
ing our long-term strategies for achieving the
in the short term and position NASA for long-term
Strategic Goals; and multiyear, outcome-oriented
success.
Performance Goals. Annual targets and milestones
allow NASA to measure and track incremental prog-
The NASA 2022 Strategic Plan outlines our continu-
ress towards achieving the Performance Goals.
ing plans for human and robotic space explora-
tion, aeronautics, technology development, and
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
8
NASA Performance Foundations
NASA's 2022 Strategic-Performance-Evidence Framework
Strategic Goals
Timeless
Strategic Objectives
Priority Questions
10+ years
4 years
Agency Priority Goals
Performance Goals
"I
2 years
2-5 years
I
Annual target
President's Management
Agenda Priorities
Multi year
Milestone / Activity
Strategic Plan
Capacity Assessment
4 years
4 years
Agency Performance Plan
Learning Agenda
2 years
4 years
Annual Performance
Annual Evaluation Plan
Report
1 year
1 year
Agency Financial Report
1 year
Agency, GAO/OIG,
Congressional priorities
Legend
GPRAMA
Evidence Act
PMA
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
9
NASA Performance Foundations
Learning Agenda, Capacity
existing Performance Goals and targets to ensure
they still accurately reflect NASA's budget, priorities,
Assessment, and Annual Evaluation
strategies, and programmatic plans. Agency Priority
Plan
Goals are a subset of Performance Goals that high-
light high-priority, high-profile activities the Agency
Congress signed the Foundations for Evidence-
plans to accomplish within a two-year timeframe.
Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act) into
The description and targets remain unchanged
law in January of 2019. The Evidence Act establishes
during the Agency Priority Goal's two-year lifespan.
a framework for agencies to organize evidence
building, data management, and data access func-
Part 2 includes a description and FY 2021 progress
tions to ensure an integrated connection to data
update on each of the Performance Goals and
and evidence. The NASA 2022 Strategic Plan includes
Agency Priority Goals.
NASA's first-ever Learning Agenda and Capacity
Assessment, which support this new requirement.
President's Management Agenda
The Learning Agenda is a roadmap for NASA to
The President's Management Agenda (PMA) defines
systematically plan evidence-building activities that
Government-wide management priorities for all
will allow the Agency to make evidence-based pol-
Federal agencies to improve how Government
icy decisions. The Learning Agenda identifies a set
operates and performs. The Biden Administration
of broad questions NASA sees as urgent to moving
PMA focuses on strategies to advance three core
our operations and Mission forward over the next
priorities: Strengthening and empowering the
four years. When answered, these questions will
Federal workforce; Delivering excellent, equitable,
help us work more effectively and efficiently, using
and secure Federal services and customer experi-
evidence to make decisions relating to missions,
ence; and Managing the business of Government to
programs, and investments.
build back better.
The Capacity Assessment provides an overview
The work of the PMA will comprise sustained, multi-
of evidence-building activities across the Agency
year, Government-wide efforts to advance each
that are appropriate to achieve NASA's Mission.
of the three PMA priorities and their supporting
The Capacity Assessment reviews NASA's ability
strategies. Through the PMA, cross-agency teams
to conduct evidence-building activities and identi-
will further seek stakeholder input, define work-
fies where resources are needed to develop and
streams, set work plans and measures, advance
improve our capacity. This process supports the
collaborative efforts, and assess and measure prog-
Agency's needs for learning and management, per-
ress across Government organizations.
formance and strategic management, interagency
To ensure effective leadership and accountability
and private sector coordination, and oversight and
across the Federal Government, each priority has
accountability.
one senior leader within the Executive Office of the
The Annual Evaluation Plan (see Appendix A: FY
President and another within one or more of the
2023 Annual Evaluation Plan) identifies evalu-
key delivery agencies. While NASA is not leading
ations the Agency plans to undertake over the
any of the PMA priorities, we will support the col-
next fiscal year. This plan cultivates data sharing
laborative efforts and this work will support per-
and resources between NASA organizations and
formance management in several mission support
provides information to help support our evi-
areas within NASA.
dence-driven culture.
Performance Assessment Criteria
Agency Performance Plan
NASA's Performance Goals consist of an out-
The Agency Performance Plan includes
come-based statement and measurable targeted
Performance Goals, which are multiyear, out-
level of performance to be achieved each year.
come-oriented statements of future achievement
We assign a color rating (see below) based on the
supporting each Strategic Objective. The Agency
actual level of performance against the annual
Performance Plan describes annual Performance
target. NASA internal success criteria determine the
Goal targets consistent with program and project
levels of performance required for a Yellow or Red
commitments in the FY 2022 budget appropriation
rating.
and the FY 2023 President's Budget Request. Every
fiscal year, NASA reevaluates and updates the
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
10
NASA Performance Foundations
Green
Yellow
Red
White
Achieved or on track
Slightly below target or
Significantly below target
Measure canceled
to achieve
behind schedule
or behind schedule
or postponed
Agency Priority Goals
NASA assesses progress toward achieving Agency Priority Goals every quarter, per GPRA Modernization Act
guidance. In addition to reporting progress to Agency leadership, we report progress to external stakehold-
ers through Performance.gov.
In January 2021, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) discontinued external reporting for the FY
2020-2021 Agency Priority Goals. NASA transitioned the four Agency Priority Goals to Performance Goals to
complete FY 2021 reporting. Below are the Performance Goals and their ratings for FY 2021, as well as the
original Agency Priority Goal description through FY 2020. Additional information can be found in Part 2.
FY 2021 Performance Goals* and Original Agency Priority Goal Statements
FY 2021 Performance Goal Statements and Related FY 2020-2021 Agency Priority
Goal Statements
Responsible Program
Rating
1.1.11: Complete shipment of the James Webb Space Telescope in
preparation for launch in FY 2022.
James Webb Space
Telescope Program,
Agency Priority Goal through FY 2020: By September 30, 2021, NASA will launch the
Yellow
Science Mission
James Webb Space Telescope, complete on-orbit checkout, and initiate observatory
Directorate (SMD)
commissioning.
2.1.2: Enable a robust commercial low Earth orbit economy in which transpor-
Commercial
tation, habitation, and on-orbit services are available for purchase by NASA
Spaceflight
and other customers.
Development and
Agency Priority Goal through FY 2020: By September 30, 2021, NASA will support the
International Space
Green
development of commercial services, including through releasing new business opportuni-
Station,
ties, supporting demonstration flights, beginning certification activities, and demonstrating
Human Exploration
commercial capabilities.
and Operations
Mission Directorate*
2.2.1: Advance America's goal to land the first woman and the next man on
Exploration Systems
the Moon by demonstrating the necessary capabilities that advance lunar
Development and
exploration.
Advanced Exploration
Agency Priority Goal through FY 2020: By September 30, 2021, NASA will launch Artemis /
Systems,
Green
and make significant progress for Artemis II, and have multiple companies under contract to
Human Exploration
develop systems to land humans on the Moon.
and Operations
Mission Directorate*
2.2.2: Commence lunar surface technology demonstrations to enable a sus-
tainable lunar surface exploration strategy.
Multiple Programs,
Space Technology
Agency Priority Goal through FY 2020: By September 30, 2021, deliver NASA science and
Yellow
Mission Directorate
technology payloads to the awarded Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) provid-
(STMD)
er(s) for delivery to the surface of the Moon.
*Performance Goal numbering is based on the NASA 2018 Strategic Plan framework.
**FY 2021 performance was managed by the Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate. This Mission Directorate was
divided into two organizations (Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate and Space Operations Mission Directorate) at
the beginning of FY 2022.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
11
NASA Performance Foundations
NASA has identified four new Agency Priority Goals for the FY 2022-2023 reporting cycle (see below). These
Agency Priority Goals are included in the NASA 2022 Strategic Plan.
FY 2022-2023 Agency Priority Goals*
Agency Priority Goal Statements
Responsible Program
1.1.4: Use the global vantage point of space to advance our understanding of the Earth system,
Multiple Programs,
its processes, and changing climate. By September 30, 2023, NASA will advance climate change
Science Mission
research by delivering two new observing systems and an upgrade to NASA's primary global
Directorate
Earth systems model.
1.2.10: After launch, deployment, and start of science operations, the James Webb Space
Telescope will study every phase in the history of our universe, ranging from the first luminous
Cosmic Origins,
glows after the Big Bang, to the formation of other stellar systems capable of supporting life on
Science Mission
planets like Earth, to the evolution of our own solar system. By September 30, 2023, NASA will
Directorate
complete commissioning of the James Webb Space Telescope, the most powerful and complex
space telescope ever built, and begin Webb's Cycle 2 observations.
Common Exploration
2.1.1: Advance America's goal to land the first woman and the first person of color on the Moon
Systems Development
and pursue a sustainable program of exploration by demonstrating capabilities that advance
and Artemis Campaign
lunar exploration. By September 30, 2023, NASA will launch Artemis I, deliver the Core Stage for
Development,
Artemis Il to Kennedy Space Center for processing, and have multiple companies under contract
Exploration Systems
to develop systems for sustainable human lunar exploration.
Development Mission
Directorate
3.1.5: Ensure American global leadership in space technology innovations through increased
Early Stage Innovation
partnering with industry and demonstrating key lunar surface and deep space technologies. By
and Partnerships,
September 30, 2023: NASA will demonstrate leadership in space technology by:
Technology
Enhancing partnerships with industry through delivery or completion of milestones for at least 4 Tipping Point
Demonstrations,
opportunities, and at least 3 critical small business technology transitions to develop capabilities that support
Technology
NASA and commercial needs;
Maturation, and SBIR
and STTR, Space
Delivering at least 3 new technologies that will be demonstrated on the lunar surface or in lunar orbit; and
Technology Mission
Completing at least 2 major milestones for projects that increase the Nation's capabilities in deep space.
Directorate (STMD)
*See https://www.performance.gov/agencies/nasa/for more information about our Agency Priority Goals.
Performance Management in Action
NASA is committed to remaining a good steward of the taxpayer's numerous investments entrusted to
our care. This includes maintaining a culture of data-driven performance management that continually
improves our performance management systems, increasing accountability, transparency, and oversight.
This approach leads to more consistent performance reporting across NASA's missions and ensures the
optimal use of our resources.
NASA plans and evaluates performance in a continuous cycle, spanning fiscal years, in conjunction with the
annual planning, programming, budgeting, and execution process used to ensure that resource alignment
supports mission and operational needs. This ongoing feedback loop ensures that plans reflect perfor-
mance expectations and, in return, those performance results inform planning decisions.
The GPRA Modernization Act requires agencies to set long-term Strategic Goals and Objectives, as well as
near-term Performance Goals. The GPRA Modernization Act also requires frequent data-driven perfor-
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
12
NASA Performance Foundations
mance reviews and a performance management
NASA's 2021 Strategic Review assessed progress
leadership structure that begins with the Agency
towards achieving the Strategic Objectives in the
Administrator, the Chief Operating Officer, the
NASA 2018 Strategic Plan. The ratings from the
Performance Improvement Officer/Evaluation
review and the Summary of Progress by Strategic
Officer, Chief Performance Management Officer,
Objective are provided in Appendix B:
and the goal leaders. The GPRA Modernization Act's
FY 2021 Summary of Progress. The 2022 Strategic
performance framework must translate across and
Review will provide a baseline for the Strategic
cascade down the organization to all Agency man-
Objectives in the NASA 2022 Strategic Plan and
agers and team leaders.
assess portfolio strategies.
Annual Strategic Reviews
Annual Performance Assessments
The annual Strategic Review process encompasses
During the third and fourth quarters of each fiscal
a comprehensive review of each of our Strategic
year, program officials assess progress towards
Objectives. Agency leaders assess progress on
achieving the Performance Goals listed in the
executing the near-, mid-, and long-term strategies
Annual Performance Plan. They determine whether
of each Strategic Objective and how contributing
targets and any supporting milestones were met
portfolios address opportunities, risks, external
as anticipated, assign the appropriate color rating,
factors, and other events that may affect progress.
and provide an explanation to support the rating.
The review also considers current or planned eval-
NASA's Performance Improvement Officer reviews
uations and evidence-building activities that may
the performance assessment results and pro-
support strategy implementation.
vides feedback and determines final ratings when
needed.
Based on a self-assessment of progress by the
Strategic Objective leader, NASA determines
NASA publishes a summary of preliminary fiscal
whether a Strategic Objective demonstrates
year performance ratings in the annual Agency
noteworthy progress, satisfactory perfor-
Financial Report, in accordance with OMB Circular
mance, or is a focus area for improvement. Our
A-136 guidance. We publish the final fiscal year
Chief Performance Management Officer and
performance ratings in the Annual Performance
Performance Improvement Officer/Evaluation
Report, which becomes part of the Volume of
Officer determine final ratings and next steps for
Integrated Performance.
the Agency. The Strategic Review inputs, findings,
and results inform our budget process and are
NASA's FY 2021 ratings for our 48 Performance
inputs to the annual performance planning pro-
Goal include 38 Green, 6 Yellow, and 1 Red. Three
cess.
Performance Goals could not be assessed for FY
2021 because of missing data and, therefore, were
rated White. (See the summary chart below.)
Summary FY 2021 Performance Goal Ratings by Strategic Objective (NASA 2018 Strategic Plan Framework)
100%
1
90%
1
80%
1
2
1
1
70%
60%
50%
1
2
3
6
3
3
2
3
10
40%
4
30%
1
2
1
20%
10%
0%
1.1
1.2
2.1
2.2
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
Strategic Goal 1
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Goal 4
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
13
NASA Performance Foundations
Part 2 presents the individual FY 2021 ratings and
and FY 2022 represent actual budget authority and
supporting performance explanations.
the budget numbers for FY 2023 through FY 2027
are based on the requested budget. The funding
The FY 2021 performance ratings and explanations
lines combine multiple programs and projects
represent the last reported performance progress
that support the Strategic Objective. The bud-
in support of the NASA 2018 Strategic Plan frame-
get numbers are rounded and will not add up to
work. Beginning in FY 2022, our performance will
NASA's total budget request. Funds for the Office of
support the NASA 2022 Strategic Plan strategy-per-
Inspector General are not included in any Strategic
formance-evidence framework.
Objective funding line.
Performance Management Goals
Enterprise Risk Management
and Mandates
The enterprise risk management process provides
Several pieces of legislation have been passed over
insights on how to effectively prioritize and manage
the years that build on the GPRA Modernization
risks to mission delivery while also providing an
Act's framework for performance management.
enterprise-wide, strategically aligned portfolio view
The key pieces of legislation that have impacted
of organizational risks, challenges, and opportuni-
performance reporting are the Evidence Act, the
ties. NASA has a program management integration
2016 update on enterprise risk management
function with matrixed support from the Office of
(M-16-17) to OMB Circular A-123, and the 2018
the Chief Engineer and Office of the Chief Financial
update (M-18-19) to the Program Management
Officer and in partnership with the Mission
Improvement Accountability Act of 2016 (PMIAA).
Directorates and Centers. While we cannot mitigate
Together this legislation informs all aspects of per-
all risks related to achieving our Strategic Goals and
formance management goals and mandates.
Objectives, the Agency is using these risk-manage-
ment strategies to identify, measure, and assess
FY 2023 Budget Request
challenges related to mission delivery to the great-
est extent possible. Enterprise risk management
FY 2023 Budget Request by Strategic Objective ($M)
is integrated with the Strategic Review process to
provide an analysis of the risks and opportunities
Strategic Objective
Requested
NASA faces in achieving the Strategic Objectives.
1.1
$1,967.2
1.2
$5,576.8
Using Evidence for Decision-Making
1.3
$444.3
NASA uses evidence to inform investment decisions
2.1
$6,153.0
at all levels, from day-to-day operations to select-
ing major missions and establishing the necessary
2.2
$4,616.6
infrastructure to pursue goals that may take a
2.3
$252.7
generation, or longer, to realize. The Evidence Act
2.4
$722.2
formalized requirements for agencies to utilize evi-
dence, evaluation, and data as a planning tool for
3.1
$1,437.9
policy and decision making.
3.2
$971.5
4.1
$108.4
Annual Evaluation Plan (see Appendix A) features
significant evaluations to support the performance
4.2
$158.9
planning process and provide evidence to deci-
4.3
$48.4
sion-makers. The Learning Agenda (see Appendix
*FY 2021 reflects funding amounts specified in Public Law 116-
A of the 2022 Strategic Plan) is a four-year plan to
260, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, as adjusted by NA-
build evidence across several priority areas for
SA's FY 2021 Operating Plan, December 2021.
NASA to cultivate interagency collaboration, estab-
The 12 Strategic Objectives are mapped to NASA's
lish pathways for dissemination and data sharing,
FY 2023 President's Budget Request. The table
and identify gaps that exist across the Agency's
above provides the FY 2023 budget request for
vibrant performance and planning culture. Both the
each Strategic Objective. Detailed budget tables,
Annual Evaluation Plan and Learning Agenda will
provided in Part 2, include the FY 2021 actual,
help us determine if we have accomplished what
FY 2022 enacted, and outyear budget numbers
we set out to do and inform future priorities.
through FY 2027. The budget numbers for FY 2021
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
14
NASA Performance Foundations
Program and Project Management
integrated Agency mission support portfolio,
and mission support plans and implementa-
for Executive Agencies
tion strategies (including facility, infrastructure,
PMIAA formalized requirements to strengthen
workforce, and associated investments); and
program and project management within Federal
determines and assesses mission support
agencies. As a research and development agency,
requirements to enable successful accomplish-
ment of our missions.
NASA uses the core concept of cost, schedule,
and program and project management to assess
The Agency Program Management Council
performance during the development phase. NASA
serves as our senior decision-making body
established a Program Management Improvement
regarding the integrated Agency mission port-
Officer and a permanent program management
folio; and baselines and assesses performance
working group to address PMIAA requirements and
of NASA projects, programs, mission director-
develop implementation plans. NASA is currently
ate portfolios, and the integrated Agency port-
carrying out a five-year PMIAA implementation
folio to ensure achievement of our Strategic
plan that includes performing periodic portfolio
Goals.
assessments to examine and determine focused
The Acquisition Strategy Council approves
improvements to our program management prac-
acquisition approaches for large, high-profile
tices, guidance, and trainings that strive to improve
programs as recommended by the sponsoring
performance overall.
Mission Directorate; decides particular work
assignments to Centers and updates to Center
Oversight and Accountability
roles; and evaluates mission needs and Agency
In setting goals and establishing plans to achieve
workforce capacity through an annual Agency
mission success, NASA leaders rely on informa-
Strategic Implementation Planning meeting.
tion from multiple sources. Rigorous indepen-
dent assessments, both internal and external to
Technical Authorities
the Agency, are an essential tool in ensuring the
integrity of data necessary to make well-informed
The Technical Authorities (Engineering, Safety and
investment decisions. Independent verification and
Mission Assurance, and Health and Medical) are
validation in planning and executing work provides
a key part of NASA's overall system of checks and
greater confidence in performance during devel-
balances and provide independent oversight of
opment and execution and improves expected
programs and projects in support of safety and
outcomes. In many cases, these assessments
mission success.
include a routine measure of progress against a
Technical Authority originates with the
predetermined set of indicators or other targets
Administrator, ensuring work on critical perfor-
that effectively establish an early warning system
mance areas adheres to Agency policy, require-
so that deviations can be more quickly and easily
ments, and standards. The fundamental aspects of
addressed.
Technical Authority are:
Governance Councils
Provide an independent view of program/proj-
ect activities;
NASA uses four senior leadership councils to gov-
ern the Agency. Councils provide high-level over-
Ensure direction to the program or project
sight, set requirements and strategic priorities, and
reflects the view of the Center or, where appro-
guide key assessments of the Agency. The council
priate, the view of the NASA Technical Authority
members evaluate issues and support decision
community;
authorities when issues involve or require high lev-
Adjudicate requests for relief (via waivers) from
els of difficulty, integration, visibility, and approval.
the Technical Authority technical baseline; and
The Executive Council determines our strate-
Implement the dissenting opinion process, to
gic direction, assesses our progress toward
support full and open discussion of substan-
achieving the NASA Vision, and serves as our
tive disagreement with a decision or decision
senior decision-making body for Agency-wide
in regard to the Technical Authority technical
decisions.
baseline.
The Mission Support Council serves as our
senior decision-making body regarding the
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
15
NASA Performance Foundations
Baseline Performance Reviews
NASA Office of Inspector
NASA conducts a monthly internal forum where
General and the Government
NASA's leadership tracks and assesses performance
of the Agency's work against established plans. The
Accountability Office
baseline performance review is a bottom-up review
Two independent organizations, the NASA
of mission and select mission support programs
Office of Inspector General and the Government
and projects with risks in performance areas such
Accountability Office, conduct both broadly and
as cost and schedule, contract commitments, and
narrowly focused evaluations of how well the
technical objectives. It also includes performance
Agency is achieving outcomes and performing to
progress for Agency Priority Goals and the annual
expectations. Evaluations cross all types of NASA
Strategic Review of our Strategic Objectives. Each
work, from planning new initiatives, managing
Mission Directorate provides a performance
major programs, implementing necessary infra-
assessment of the activity it oversees and ana-
structure modernization, to the potential impact
lysts outside of the performing organization con-
of legislation and policy. The Office of Inspector
duct independent assessments. NASA's Technical
General and contracted independent auditors are
Authorities provide oversight and an additional
also employed to review the Agency's financial
level of control.
record keeping systems, compliance with require-
ments, and financial controls. NASA reviews the
Program and Project Key Decision
resulting reports and provides feedback on how
the Agency will improve on identified management
Point Reviews
challenges.
As stated above, NASA requires internal indepen-
dent assessments on the progress of programs and
projects through their life cycles. Senior leaders
convene a series of formal gatekeeping key deci-
sion point reviews, requiring managers to provide
assessments of how the programs and projects are
performing in key areas. Such key decision points
are specific milestones at which managers must
provide Agency leadership with information about
program maturity and readiness to progress to the
next stage of the life cycle (see the figure on page
17.).
The mandatory reviews at key decision point mile-
stones focus on the program or project's assess-
ment of status, as well as that of the Standing
Review Board or mission directorate independent
review team. Multiple stakeholder organizations
also have the opportunity to weigh in on the infor-
mation presented. Other reviews may be sched-
uled, in accordance with the lifecycle schedule of
that project and depending on the formulation,
development implementation, or construction
plan. Additionally, NASA senior leaders monitor
overall performance monthly through the Baseline
Performance Review. NASA provides Congress,
OMB, and the Government Accountability Office
with cost and schedule updates for major projects
with an estimated lifecycle cost of $250 million or
greater.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
16
NASA Performance Foundations
NASA Flight Project Lifecycle Phases, Key Decision Points, and Milestones"
NASA
Lifecycle
Phases
Formulation
Implementation
PHASE A:
PHASE B:
PHASE D:
Preliminary
PHASE C:
System
PHASE E:
Lifecycle
Concept &
Final Design &
Assembly,
Phase F:
Technology
Design &
Phases
Development
Technology
Fabrication
Integration &
Operations &
Sustainment
Closeout
Completion
Test, Launch &
Checkout
Major
KDP-A
KDP-B
KDP-C
KDP-D
KDP-E
KDP-F
Lifecycle
Reviews &
End of
Events
SRR
PDR
CDR
SIR
PSR
Launch
Mission
DRR
Key Decision Point (KDP) is an event where NASA determines whether a project is ready to move to the next phase of its life cycle and establishes content, cost, and schedule
commit-
ments for that phase
System Requirements
Preliminary Design
Critical Design Review
System Integration
Pre-Ship Review (PSR)
Disposal Readiness
Review (SRR) evaluates
Review (PDR) evaluates
(CDR) evaluates the proj-
Review (SIR) evaluates
ensures the completeness of
Review (DRR) evalu-
whether the functional and
completeness/consistency
ect design and its ability to
whether the projects is
any item of hardware or soft-
ates the readiness of the
performance requirements for
of the planning, technical,
meet mission requirements
ready for integration and
ware before it is released to
project and system for a
the system meet the needs
cost, and schedule baselines
with appropriate margins
test, can be completed with
another facility for integration
disposal event, such as
of the project and represent
developed during Formulation
and acceptable risk
available resources, and is
with a larger system or the
deorbiting
achievable capabilities
ready for Phase D
spacecraft
*Project lifecycle phases, key decision points, and milestones are established by and defined in NASA Space Flight Program and Proj-
ect Management Requirements (NASA Procedural Requirements 7120.5E) and NASA Research and Technology Program and Project
Management Requirements (NASA Procedural Requirements 7120.8A).
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
17
Strategies for Improvement
THE STATE OF
N/S/
MES ARMSTRONG GL DDARD HEADQUARTEPS
STENNIS AMES ARN NASA GUENN
ENN GODDARD BTERS
ALL
NINEDY LA
Strategies for Improvement
NASA's commitment to good governance and stewardship of taxpayer funds requires that the Agency
routinely conducts internal assessments and evaluations to aid in maintaining, managing, and improving
operations. In addition, periodic external assessments focus management attention on areas of high risk or
potential difficulty. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) and the NASA Office of Inspector General
(OIG) conduct such external assessments, identifying trouble spots and recommending how to address
them. Issues raised by the GAO and OIG represent high-priority areas for management attention.
High Risk Areas Identified by the GAO
The GAO assesses management activities across the Federal Government and identifies practices and
vulnerabilities that put agencies at risk of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. The GAO's High Risk
List, updated every two years, has included NASA's acquisition management since the list was established
in 1990. To assist in corrective action planning, the GAO established five criteria that, if addressed, would
substantively improve operations and clear the GAO's concern about high-risk activity:
Leadership Commitment: Demonstrated strong commitment and top leadership support.
Capacity: Agency has the capacity (i.e., people and resources) to resolve the risk(s).
Action Plan: A corrective action plan exists that defines the root cause, solutions, and provides for
substantially completing corrective measures, including steps necessary to implement recommended
solutions.
Monitoring: A program has been instituted to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and
sustainability of corrective measures.
Demonstrated Progress: Ability to demonstrate progress in implementing corrective measures and
resolving high-risk areas.
Above: NASA Administrator Bill Nelson talks to the Agency's workforce during his first State of NASA event on June 2, 2021, at NASA Headquarters Mary W.
Jackson Building in Washington, DC. Nelson remarked on his long history with NASA, and among other topics, discussed our plans for future Earth-focused
missions to address climate change and a robotic and human return to the Moon through the Artemis program, as well as announcing two new planetary
science missions to Venus, VERITAS and DAVINCI+ Image Credit: NASA/Bill Ingalls
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
18
Strategies for Improvement
As part of the 2019 update for NASA, High-Risk
necessary to continue driving improvements in
Series: Dedicated Leadership Needed to Address
the Agency's program and project management
Limited Progress in Most High-Risk Areas (GAO-
policies and processes. The plan was comprised
21-119SP), the GAO included a scorecard detailing
of seven initiatives to implement, one initiative to
which of these criteria for improving acquisition
pilot, and one initiative to research.
management have been met, partially met, or have
not been met. NASA has fully met the criteria for
Between the start of the 2018 plan in December
leadership commitment, a corrective action plan.
2018 and approval of the 2020 plan in July 2020, six
NASA has partially met the criteria for capacity and
initiatives were completed, one (Improve Human
demonstrated progress. The 2021 report reflects an
Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate
improvement in the leadership commitment and
(HEOMD) Portfolio Insight and Status) was closed
monitoring areas over the previous 2019 report.
and rewritten to better align to GAO's open prior-
ity recommendations and to clarify tracking and
NASA's responses to these challenges have yielded
closure requirements, and two longer-term initia-
more credible cost and schedule baselines, and
tives remained in process. The two ongoing initia-
both the GAO and OIG have observed that NASA's
tives-Enhanced Earned Value Management (EVM)
management of its small-and medium-class major
Implementation and Program Planning and Control
flight projects has improved. The effectiveness of
(PP&C) Training Curriculum-are intended to be
these tools is particularly evident for the smaller
longer-term initiatives. The initiative to pilot an
(under $1 billion lifecycle cost) projects. However,
Agency schedule repository was deemed a success
NASA needs to improve management of its larger,
and a new initiative to fully implement the schedule
more complex projects, which typically involve
repository was put into place.
the development of a significant number of new
technologies, greater integration risk, and early
The August 2020 Corrective Action Plan update
cost and schedule estimation challenges. The
also included two new initiatives. One initiative will
GAO observed that risks remain for NASA's largest
be to implement enhancements to NASA's Cost
flagship-type projects, such as the James Webb
Analysis and Data Requirements (CADRe) data
Space Telescope (Webb) (see 1.2.10: Complete com-
collection process to better capture critical data
missioning of the James Webb Space Telescope,
from Category III/Class D missions. The other will
the most powerful and complex space telescope
see that major acquisitions (contracts greater than
ever built, and begin Webb's Cycle 2 observations.
$500 million) include an evaluation of the financial
(Agency Priority Goal)), the Space Launch System
health, stability, and outlook of organizations under
(SLS), and Orion (see the Artemis Performance
consideration prior to contract award in order to
Goal 2.1.1: Advance America's goal to land the first
enhance competitive and sole-selection procure-
woman and first person of color on the Moon by
ment processes.
demonstrating capabilities that advance lunar
exploration. (Agency. Priority Goal)).
As described in the August 2020 Corrective Action
Plan, the next iteration of the Corrective Action Plan
A Corrective Action Plan
will be considered, evaluated, and pursued in the
first half of calendar year 2022. The progress of
for Acquisition Management
current initiatives will be assessed and/or closed,
Improvements
and new initiatives will be considered for inclusion
that address current and emergent issues. NASA's
NASA released an updated high-risk corrective
Associate Administrator will decide on the 2022
action plan in August 2020 in response to the con-
corrective action plan in the summer of CY 2022 via
tinued inclusion of NASA's acquisition practices in
the Agency Program Management Council. A sum-
GAO's 2019 high-risk report, as well as recent chal-
mer implementation of a Corrective Action Plan
lenges in cost schedule growth experienced by sev-
update will serve to inform the GAO as they begin
eral of NASA's highest profile missions. The overall
work on the upcoming 2023 high risk-report.
goal of the plan is to strengthen the Agency's
cutting-edge program and project management
NASA will release the next update to the Corrective
efforts across the board and improve transparency
Action Plan in 2022.
to stakeholders.
In September 2018, NASA senior leadership deter-
mined that a new corrective action plan was
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
19
Strategies for Improvement
Management Challenges Identified
and Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (Orion) cap-
sule in all three missions. For Artemis III, the Orion
by the OIG
capsule-with four astronauts on board-wil dock
Each fiscal year, NASA's OIG issues a letter sum-
in lunar orbit with a Human Landing System (HLS)
to transport astronauts to the lunar surface, and
marizing what the Inspector General considers to
the astronauts will require next-generation space-
be NASA's most serious management and perfor-
mance challenges, as well as a brief assessment
suits, known as Exploration Extravehicular Mobility
Units, to explore the lunar surface. Subsequent
regarding the Agency's progress in addressing
those challenges. NASA leverages the results of OIG
Artemis missions are expected to include a lon-
ger-term presence on the Moon that incorporates
audits to improve the overall efficiency and effec-
additional systems, including a lunar orbiting out-
tiveness of its programs, projects, and functional
post called the Gateway and Lunar Terrain Vehicles
activities. NASA also is committed to ensuring
timely and responsive final management decisions,
to transport crew on the Moon's surface.
along with timely and complete final management
As the OIG has reported in previous reports, NASA's
action, on all audit recommendations issued the
greatest challenge with its human exploration
NASA OIG.
ambitions is development of the systems required
To this end, NASA has implemented a comprehen-
to get humans to the Moon and Mars safely with
sive program of audit follow-up intended to ensure
the funding Congress has allocated and within
that audit recommendations issued by the OIG
the timeframe the Administration has imposed.
are resolved and implemented in a timely, respon-
For example, for FY 2021, Congress appropriated
sive, and effective manner. NASA's audit follow-up
only $850 million out of an estimated need of $3.4
billion for the HLS. As a result, the NASA selected
program is a key element in improving the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of NASA's programs,
a single company, thereby affecting its acquisition
projects, and operations. The requirements for
strategy to promote competition and redundancy.
managing the OIG's recommendations are detailed
To mitigate the risk of having only one provider,
NASA decided to accelerate its Lunar Exploration
in NASA's FY 2020 Agency Financial Report.
Transportation Services procurement to allow
The OIG's 2021 Report on NASA's Top Management
other companies to develop technologies and
and Performance Challenges continues the seven
potentially receive a contract to deliver astronauts
challenges identified in 2020 and adds a new chal-
to the Moon. The OIG also found that delays in
lenge focused on the impacts of COVID-19. Below is
development of the Agency's next-generation
a summary of the report.
spacesuits-attributec to technical challenges,
funding issues, and COVID-19 impacts-wil pre-
Returning Humans to the Moon
clude the new suits from being ready for flight no
earlier than April 2025 and will cost more than
The Artemis program-currently NASA's most
a billion dollars for development and assembly.
ambitious and costly ongoing activity-is projected
These are only two recent examples in a series
to cost the Agency $93 billion by FY 2025 and will
of long-standing challenges to build the systems
require decades-long engagement from NASA and
required for the Agency's Artemis missions and
its commercial and international partners to build
follow-on Mars exploration plans.
and support multiple exploration systems, conduct
research and technology demonstrations to return
Overall, NASA has made progress towards exe-
humans to the Moon, and prepare for an eventual
cuting the first three Artemis missions, culminat-
crewed mission to Mars. The date of the long-
ing with the planned return of astronauts to the
awaited return, however, remains a question since
surface of the Moon. The OIG estimates that the
development delays, compounded by the COVID-19
SLS, Orion, and Exploration Ground Systems pro-
pandemic, will preclude NASA from meeting its goal
grams will be ready to launch Artemis I by summer
of landing astronauts on the Moon by late 2024.
2022. In addition, NASA completed all the contract
awards necessary for the initial Gateway capability
Artemis is a multi-mission program that allows
when it awarded Northrop Grumman a fixed-price
NASA to extend the length and complexity of lunar
contract in July 2021 for the final design and build
missions over time. The first three missions-
phase of the Habitation and Logistics Outpost.
Artemis I, II, and II-culminate with astronauts
Development continues for the electrical power
landing on the Moon with Artemis III. NASA will use
system for the Gateway's Power and Propulsion
the Space Launch System (SLS) heavy-lift rocket
Element. For Artemis III, NASA allowed flexibility for
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
20
Strategies for Improvement
HLS proposers to either dock with the Gateway or
than initially planned. Although most of the cost
directly with Orion. NASA's award to SpaceX for the
growth comes from two of NASA's major proj-
Artemis III demonstration includes its HLS Starship
ects-James Webb Space Telescope (Webb) and
linking up directly with the crewed Orion in lunar
SLS-other major projects have experienced both
orbit to ferry astronauts to and from the Moon's
cost and schedule growth. Some of this can be
surface. NASA aims to have the Gateway oper-
attributed to the impacts of COVID-19. Additionally,
ational in time for Artemis IV. Lastly, the Agency
NASA has struggled to provide reliable lifecycle cost
continues to develop its next-generation spacesuit
estimates for complex projects involving multiple,
capabilities, including a testing suit, two qualifi-
first-of-their-kind components (such as Webb) and
cation suits, an International Space Station (ISS)
missions that involve multiple iterations of major
demonstration suit, and two lunar flight suits.
projects without a definitive lifecycle end date (like
the SLS rocket and Orion capsule for Artemis).
Despite progress towards developing its Artemis
systems, the OIG states that NASA still needs to
The OIG states that, overall, NASA remains chal-
produce a comprehensive estimate that consoli-
lenged to complete its major projects within their
dates all Artemis costs across Mission Directorates.
planned costs and schedules due to a culture of
Because Artemis is not a formal program as
optimism, underestimating technical complexity,
defined by the Agency's Space Flight Program and
and funding instability-all long-standing issues.
Project Management Requirements, an Artemis-
However, the OIG notes that NASA's recent efforts
wide full lifecycle cost estimate was not required.
to improve management of its major projects
Instead, NASA's disparate programs and projects
have shown indications of improved performance
individually submit budget estimates through
and reduced costs for several projects, including
their divisions and directorates to the Office of the
Landsat 9 and Psyche. Progress toward improving
Chief Financial Officer. Without understanding and
NASA's acquisition management is demonstrated
accurately reporting the overall cost of current and
by the Agency's commitment to implement its 2018
future missions, Congress will lack the information
Corrective Action Plan, which addressed the causes
needed to make informed decisions about NASA's
of cost and schedule concerns highlighted in GAO's
long-term funding needs, and the Agency will be
High-Risk List. As a result of the Corrective Action
challenged to make Artemis a sustainable venture.
Plan's initiatives, NASA has developed best prac-
tices, added additional requirements, and imple-
The OIG also is concerned that relying on such an
mented external monitoring related to cost and
expensive heavy-lift rocket system will inhibit if
schedule of major projects. GAO's 2021 High-Risk
not derail NASA's ability to sustain its long-term
Series report listed NASA's acquisition management
human exploration goals. NASA's Commercial
as one of only seven high-risk areas throughout the
Crew Program shows how competitively awarded
entire Federal government that showed progress
fixed-price contracts can control costs if require-
toward meeting criteria for removal from the High-
ments are properly defined. NASA has applied this
Risk List over the past two years.
acquisition model to the Gateway's Power and
Propulsion Element and HLS procurements and
The OIG urges NASA to redouble its efforts to
intends to use a commercial services approach for
ensure that its science and space exploration proj-
next-generation spacesuits. NASA needs to develop
ects are grounded in accurate estimates and meet
a realistic, risk-informed schedule that includes suf-
cost, schedule, and performance goals. Given a lim-
ficient margin to better align Agency expectations
ited budget to fund multiple ambitious projects, it
with the development schedule.
is critical that NASA implement planned changes to
its Joint Cost and Schedule Confidence Level policy,
See Strategic Objective 2.1: Explore the surface
as well as demonstrate sustained progress com-
of the Moon and deep space. and in Appendix B,
pleting initiatives in its 2020 Corrective Action Plan.
Strategic Objective 2.2: Conduct human explora-
Furthermore, when taking on a mission, require-
tion in deep space, including to the surface of the
ments should be clearly defined, affordable, cap-
Moon.
tured, and communicated early in the development
effort to reduce the risk of costly design changes.
Improving Management of Major
For example, NASA has begun to acquire major
Projects
Artemis systems such as the Gateway and the HLS
through public-private partnerships, but it has still
Historically, NASA's major projects have cost signifi-
not fully defined the lunar system architecture or
cantly more and taken much longer to complete
established requirements for its lunar missions.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
21
Strategies for Improvement
Consequently, NASA will need to address potential
The OIG notes that the first certified commer-
requirements and technology development knowl-
cial flight of astronauts was launched into space
edge gaps in Artemis projects due to a lack of firm
in November 2020 from Crew Dragon, SpaceX's
requirements before entering implementation.
commercial crew transportation vehicle, during the
pandemic had closed NASA's facilities and at least
For more information, see Strategic Objective 1.1:
90 percent of its workforce was teleworking. This
Understand the Earth system and its climate.,
was the first time since the end of the Space Shuttle
Strategic Objective 1.2: Understand the Sun,
Program that American astronauts were able to
solar system, and universe., Strategic Objective
launch on a U.S. vehicle. However, the Commercial
2.1: Explore the surface of the Moon and deep
Crew Program continues to be challenged by
space., and in Appendix B, Strategic Objective 1.1:
Boeing's CST-100 Starliner vehicle, which encoun-
Understand the Sun, Earth, solar system, and uni-
tered numerous delays and technical issues, and it
verse. and Strategic Objective 2.2: Conduct human
is not clear when the Starliner will conduct its first
exploration in deep space, including to the surface
crewed flight. Until that time, NASA will be required
of the Moon.
to rely on SpaceX for commercial transportation to
the ISS.
Sustaining a Human Presence in
The new Roll-Out Solar Array increased the ISS's
Low Earth Orbit
power production, ensuring that future power
The continuous operation of research and technol-
needs can be met, and the aging batteries were
ogy demonstrations in low Earth orbit is critical to
replaced with more efficient lithium-ion batteries.
achieving NASA's goals in science, technology, and
In addition, NASA installed the first privately funded
human space flight. Without the availability of a
commercial airlock (the NanoRacks Bishop Airlock)
low Earth orbit platform to conduct critical health
on the ISS, increasing the capability for transferring
research and demonstrate key technologies, NASA
equipment, payloads, and deployable satellites to
would be faced with the difficult decision of accept-
meet growing customer demands.
ing a higher level of risk or delaying human mis-
In FY 2021, NASA invested more than $13 million
sions to the Moon and Mars. The U.S. segment of
the International Space Station (ISS) is structurally
in seed money for seven companies to develop
certified to operate until 2028. Recent events high-
in-space production applications in what industry
light risks to the ISS's operational performance, and
studies indicate are the most promising areas for
while NASA determined that these events do not
profitable manufacturing in space. Most of these
pose an immediate threat to the ISS's operational
in-space production applications are sponsored by
longevity, NASA and its partners will eventually
CASIS, which is working with NASA to implement a
have to come to a decision to initiate its decommis-
six-point plan to ensure they maximize the benefit
sioning and deorbit.
of the ISS National Laboratory for the remainder
of its time in orbit. There also is a high level of
Looking forward, NASA plans to maintain a human
demand for private astronaut missions to the ISS.
presence in low Earth orbit after the ISS is retired
In June 2021, NASA moved to an annual competitive
by becoming a customer of commercially owned
process for selecting up to two private astronaut
and operated space destinations. This will require
missions per year based on availability. In addition,
a sustained but largely undetermined financial
NASA awarded Axiom Space a firm-fixed-price
investment by the Federal government and pri-
contract of $140 million to provide at least one
vate companies. NASA's initial efforts to develop a
habitable commercial module attached to the ISS,
commercial market-relying on the Center for the
which will detach and become a free-flying desti-
Advancement of Science in Space, Inc. (CASIS) to
nation prior to the ISS be deorbited. In July 2021,
advance research endeavors for the commercial
NASA announced its Commercial Low Earth Orbit
sector-were unsuccessful. In 2019, NASA released
Destinations initiative to encourage development
a plan to expand commercial opportunities in
of a commercial successor to the ISS through pub-
space beyond what was initially allowed under
lic-private partnerships.
CASIS, including private astronaut missions to the
ISS. However, Congress authorized NASA to spend
See Strategic Objective 2.2: Develop a human
only $17 million to support commercial low Earth
spaceflight economy enabled by a commercial
orbit development in FY 2021-just over 10 percent
market. and Appendix B, Strategig Objective 2.1: Lay
the foundation for America to maintain a constant
of the Agency's requested $150 million.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
22
Strategies for Improvement
human presence in low Earth orbit enabled by a
readiness NASA's cybersecurity posture, and NASA
commercial market. for more information.
senior management has made a combination of
strategic, risk management, and collaboration deci-
Managing and Mitigating
sions that have begun to strengthen the Agency's
cybersecurity posture. In January 2022, under the
Cybersecurity Risk
Mission Support Future Architecture Program,
Center Chief Information Security Officers and
Over the past 20 years, the OIG has identified
cybersecurity staff will be realigned from the Center
securing NASA's information technology (IT) sys-
OCIO to the Senior Agency Information Security
tems and data as a top management challenge
Officer, moving the Agency towards an enterprise
due, in large part, to the Agency's deficient IT man-
computing model that would centralize and consol-
agement practices. For 2021, the OIG focused on
idate IT capabilities, such as software management
three specific cybersecurity challenges the Agency
and cybersecurity. Additionally, in February 2022
is facing with an emphasis on practical issues
the OCIO anticipates it will award the Cybersecurity
where meaningful improvement and near-term
and Privacy Enterprise Solutions and Services
progress is achievable: (1) improper use incidents,
contract that expects to eliminate duplicative cyber
(2) mobile device security, and (3) assessment and
services and the need for Center-based IT security
authorization (A&A) process.
contracts.
Improper Use Incidents - In a May 2021 audit, the
For more information, see Strategig Objective 4.2:
OIG found that improper use incidents increased
Transform mission support capabilities for the
from 249 in 2017 to 1,103 in 2020-a 343 per-
next era of aerospace. and Appendix B, Strategic
cent growth-with failing to protect Sensitive
Objective 4.5: Ensure enterprise protection.
But Unclassified information the most prevalent
abuse. For instance, unencrypted email contain-
ing Sensitive But Unclassified data, Personally
Improving Oversight of Contracts,
Identifiable Information, and International Traffic
Grants, and Cooperative
in Arms Regulations data continues to expose the
Agency to unnecessary cyber risk that can affect
Agreements
national security, loss of intellectual property, and
NASA's acquisition management has been a GAO
compromise of employee and contractor data.
high-risk area for three decades. Similarly, the OIG
has highlighted acquisition as an Agency manage-
Mobile Device Security - In an August 2020 audit,
ment challenge for the past 15 years, with identified
the OIG found that the OCIO is not adequately
weaknesses in both oversight of the acquisition
monitoring and enforcing the business rules estab-
process and the readiness of its acquisition work-
lished for NASA's more than 15,000 mobile devices,
force. Over the past decade, OIG financial state-
potentially exposing the email system and data to
ment audits have identified challenges in timely
viruses, malware, or hacking through connected
closing out of contracts to ensure the government
mobile devices. Since the outbreak of COVID-19,
received what it contracted for, detected and recov-
exposure to cyber threats has increased because
ered erroneous payments, made final payments to
NASA's workforce has shifted to telework, increas-
the contractors, and deobligated excess funds.
ing the usage of mobile devices.
NASA continues to be challenged with oversight of
A&A Process - In May 2021, the OIG reported that
its acquisition process. Most recently, in a July 2021
NASA is inconsistent and ineffective with its A&A
audit of NASA's cooperative agreements with the
process because of its decades-long decentralized
Universities Space Research Association, the OIG
approach to cybersecurity. Over the past 6 years,
reported that the Agency needed to take additional
the OIG has reported that certain types of assess-
steps to improve its management and financial
ment data have been ignored or discarded as
oversight of cooperative agreements, especially
irrelevant during the A&A process, leaving systems
with regard to significant extensions and augmen-
incorrectly categorized at lower risk impact levels
tations to those agreements. The OIG FY 2020
than their criticality requires, resulting in increased
financial statement audit also revealed oversight
vulnerability to cyber risks.
issues with the Agency's internal controls related to
The OIG notes that having a tenured Senior Agency
the grant management process that the OIG found
Information Security Officer in place for more than
were not designed to effectively monitor grantees
4 years has been critical to advancing cybersecurity
and the Federal awards they received.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
23
Strategies for Improvement
More broadly, NASA is challenged with Agency-
acquisition workforce as the Agency continues
wide oversight of its acquisition workforce. The
to implement an enterprise-wide approach to
OIG expresses concern that NASA does not collect
procurement under the Mission Support Future
Agency-wide acquisition workforce workload or
Architecture Program. The OIG states that despite
performance data, which limits its ability to have an
establishing strategic frameworks for change,
accurate picture of who comprises the acquisition
NASA has had limited success implementing these
workforce, determine whether they are certified
efforts to reorganize Agency-wide operations.
as required, and measure workforce performance
Furthermore, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel
consistently across the entire Agency.
noted in its 2020 Annual Report that NASA was not
addressing certain workforce issues at the strategic
NASA has taken numerous steps to address its con-
level, risking an erosion of expertise and experi-
tract management challenges. The ongoing Mission
ence in the NASA workforce, thereby undermining
Support Future Architecture Program, NASA's
NASA's ability to effectively manage the highly
transition to an enterprise-wide workforce, allows
complex risk problems of future exploration pro-
the Office of Procurement to leverage employ-
grams, including those envisioned for the Artemis
ees' skills for use across the Agency. The Office of
campaign.
Procurement has developed a Strategic Workforce
Plan to maintain a workforce capable of respond-
The OIG notes that of the nearly 12,000 civil servant
ing to current and future contracting needs. They
science and engineering employees (representing
also have developed an Acquisition Portfolio
nearly 65 percent of the civil servant workforce),
Assessment Team to assess all Agency contracts
6,000 are over 50 years old, and of those employ-
and identify redundant contracts managed at the
ees, approximately 3,000 were eligible to retire in
Center level. NASA has consolidated the award and
2021. These potential impending retirements could
administration of grants and cooperative agree-
result in a significant loss of institutional knowl-
ments through the NASA Shared Services Center.
edge and skills. As an agency highly dependent on
This consolidation is designed to improve service
skilled STEM workers to accomplish its mission,
and data quality, standardize processes, leverage
NASA remains at risk from a shortage of such
skills and investments, and provide economies
staff. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported
of scale. In addition, NASA has made efforts to
the STEM labor market is highly segmented into
increase its efficiency in closing expired grants
different disciplines, sectors, and skill levels with
by incentivizing closeout contractors to complete
varying degrees of supply and demand. In 2018,
timely and proper grant closeout.
the Executive Director of the American Institute
of Aeronautics and Astronautics testified before
Attracting and Retaining a Highly
Congress about a STEM worker shortage in the
aerospace community. The Institute also high-
Skilled and Diverse Workforce
lighted in its work the need to increase diversity
Previous OIG audits have shown that NASA faces
and foster inclusion by encouraging women and
interrelated workforce challenges, including not
underrepresented minorities to pursue careers in
having enough employees with the right skills in
the aerospace industry and emphasized that STEM
technical areas; implementation shortfalls; an aging
school curriculums should be aligned to current
workforce; and science, technology, engineering,
workforce needs.
and mathematics (STEM) pipeline risks. NASA OIG
and GAO have reported on multiple NASA proj-
NASA is implementing a flexible and agile work-
ects-Low-Boom Flight Demonstrator, Europa
force approach through the Strategic Workforce
Clipper, and Mars 2020 to name a few-that have
Plan and replacing its aging talent acquisition sys-
experienced workforce challenges, including not
tem with one that will enable the Agency to more
having enough staff at the right times or staff
strategically hire, develop, and manage its work-
force. NASA has also made efforts to reduce the
with the right skills. In 2020, the OIG reported that
NASA's engineering technical disciplines faced sig-
hiring cycle time, leverage special hiring authorities,
nificant risks to their specialized workforces, with
clear the hiring backlog from prior years, and work
particular concern to the loss of unique skillsets
with Centers and Mission Directorates to develop
from retiring employees before their knowledge
plans to lessen the impact of a future retirement
wave.
could be passed on to others within the Agency.
More recently, the OIG reported on NASA's chal-
For the past 9 years, NASA has been voted the best
lenges to develop an agile and mission-driven
large agency to work for in the Federal government
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
24
Strategies for Improvement
and again held the top rank in 2020 according to
The OIG also found in a December 2020 audit that
the Partnership for Public Service. NASA is attempt-
hazardous materials pose a safety risk to NASA
ing to cultivate a diverse and innovative workforce
installations. Hazardous materials are used daily,
with the right balance of skills and experience to
including acids, bases, and oxidizers in research
provide an inclusive work environment. NASA is
laboratories; propellants and fuels in engine test-
rolling out at least two initiatives-Agency Unity
ing; ethanol-based solvents in engineering labo-
Campaign for employees emphasizing mission suc-
ratories; ammonia, acetone, and glycols in flight
cess through increased collaboration, connection,
equipment operations; and chemicals in simulated
and communication, and Mission Equity, a com-
planetary environmental testing. These materials
prehensive effort to assess expansion and modi-
can be toxic, reactive, flammable, or explosive and,
fication of NASA programs, procurements, grants,
if poorly managed, can result in costly cleanup
and policies, and examine potential barriers and
efforts, damage to facilities and equipment, per-
challenges for communities that are historically
sonal injury, and loss of mission capabilities. The
underrepresented and underserved. NASA also is
OIG's review found that hazardous materials are
making efforts to attract and retain underserved
not managed uniformly across NASA and the
and underrepresented students in engineering and
Agency lacks adequate internal controls for manag-
other STEM fields in partnership with minority serv-
ing its hazardous materials inventory.
ing and other higher education institutions
One key goal of NASA's Construction of Facilities
See Strategic Objective 4.1: Attract and develop a
(CoF) program is to modernize the Agency's infra-
talented and diverse workforce. and Appendix B,
structure into fewer, more sustainable facilities and
Strategic Objective 4.4: Manage human capital.
repair failing infrastructure to reduce overall main-
tenance costs. Between FYs 2016 and 2020, NASA
Managing NASA's Outdated
received nearly $1.8 billion in CoF funding that has
resulted in an increasing number of projects to
Infrastructure and Facilities
construct and facilities to upgrade. In relation to
NASA is one of the largest property holders in the
hazardous materials, NASA is updating policies and
Federal government, with $40 billion in physical
procedures to designate appropriate officials to
assets and an inventory of more than 5,000 build-
approve hazardous materials purchases, track and
ings and structures. Of these, over 75 percent are
report hazardous material inventories, and inspect
beyond their original design life. In addition, NASA
and evaluate storage sites.
has 166 abandoned properties worth $291 million
that present a safety and maintenance liability due
For more information, see Strategic Objective 4.2:
to their structural or interior deficiencies.
Transform mission support capabilities for the
next era of aerospace. and Appendix B, Strategic
While NASA strives to keep its facilities opera-
Objective 4.6: Sustain infrastructure capabilities
tional, it faces a deferred maintenance backlog
and operations.
estimated at $2.8 billion as of 2021. The OIG states
that this has resulted in unscheduled mainte-
Managing the Impacts of COVID-19
nance costing up to three times more to repair
on NASA's Mission and Workforce
or replace equipment after it has failed than if
NASA conducted regular scheduled maintenance.
During the first 6 months of the pandemic, the OIG
Furthermore, NASA implemented its emergency
found that 56 of NASA's programs and projects
pandemic response plan in March 2020, which
were impacted and could potentially incur a total
closed all facilities except those necessary to pro-
lifetime cost growth of $3 billion. In addition, the
tect critical infrastructure and ongoing missions.
pandemic would continue to affect 35 programs
Consequently, NASA was forced to scale back
and projects into FY 2022 and beyond. The OIG
work on construction and maintenance projects,
cites inability to conduct onsite activities, workforce
resulting in increased costs and schedule delays.
startup inefficiencies, and delivery delays of gov-
In a September 2021 audit, the OIG found that 101
ernment furnished equipment.
construction projects across the Agency reported
nearly $11 million in contractor requests for equi-
This dramatic shift in NASA's operations, which has
table adjustment, and facility closures delayed
required 90 percent of its workforce to work from
project schedules by 5 months on average.
home for an extended period of time, has raised
fundamental questions about how the workforce
will return to on-site work after it is deemed safe
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
25
Strategies for Improvement
to do so. Additionally, the Biden Administration
released a pair of Executive Orders in September
2021 requiring COVID-19 vaccinations for Federal
employees and contractors.
Despite the ongoing challenges NASA continues
to face due to COVID-19, the Agency has demon-
strated flexibility and adaptability in its operations.
NASA began categorizing and tracking COVID-19's
impact on its programs and projects beginning in
April 2020. To accommodate new work-life dynam-
ics resulting from COVID-19, NASA successfully
expanded its telework capabilities and continued
software development remotely. In addition, NASA
used about 35 percent of its $60 million CARES Act
appropriation to pay for contractor leave autho-
rized under Section 3610.
While NASA will be unable to quantify the complete
impact of the pandemic until after the COVID-19
emergency has subsided, the Agency has estab-
lished a long-term baseline for normal operations.
Looking forward, OIG notes that the Agency will
face new challenges in implementing a far-reaching
return-to onsite-work plan for large swaths of its
workforce, which likely will embrace significantly
expanded telework and remote work flexibilities.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
26
Organized for Success and Sustainability
Mary W. Jackson
NASA Headquarters
Building Naming Ceremony
(NASA
TENNIS AMES ARMSTRON
NN
JARTERS JOHNSON
MARSHALL "STENNIS AMES
TRO
HEADQUARTERS
Organized for Success and
Sustainability
NASA is organized for success, with a leadership model that optimizes strategic direction at the Agency level,
facilitates management at the functional levels in the mission directorates and mission support offices, and
enables a wide range of activities at centers and facilities. The distributed and diverse nature of our work is
unified by an integrated performance culture that engages employees and stakeholders at all levels.
The innovative, responsive, and dynamic nature of our work benefits from the relationships within and
between Mission Directorates, Mission Support Offices, and Centers. This organizational model ensures our
leaders can take both a holistic and more narrowly focused approach to programmatic, operational, busi-
ness, and safety management.
Centers and Facilities Nationwide
NASA's best asset for achieving mission success is a diverse, multidisciplinary, and skilled workforce across
all Centers and facilities. NASA's approach to performance management is based on the premise that each
team member brings unique experience and important expertise to projects. NASA is committed to nurtur-
ing an organizational culture in which individuals make full use of their time, talent, and opportunities to
pursue the highest standards in engineering, research, operations, and management.
Artist Tenbeete Solomon, also known as Trap Bob, right, presents her artwork honoring Mary W. Jackson to Wanda Jackson, granddaughter of Mary W.
Jackson, left, during a ceremony officially naming the NASA Headquarters building in honor of Mary W. Jackson, February 26, 2021, at NASA Headquarters
in Washington, DC. Mary W. Jackson, the first African American female engineer at NASA, began her career with the Agency in the segregated West Area
Computing Unit of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. The mathematician and aerospace engineer went on to lead programs influ-
encing the hiring and promotion of women in NASA's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics careers. In 2019, she posthumously received the
Congressional Gold Medal. Image Credit: NASA/Joel Kowsky
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
27
Organized for Success and Sustainability
NASA's Centers and Facilities
Neil A. Armstrong
Test Facility
Glenn Research Center (GRC)
(managed by GRC)
Software Independent Verification
and Validation Facility (managed by GSFC)
Goddard Institute
for Space Studies
(managed by GSFC)
Goddard Space
Flight Center (GSFC)
Ames Research
Wallops Flight Facility
Center (ARC)
(managed by GSFC)
Mary W. Jackson Headquarters
Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (JPL)
Langley Research Center (LaRC)
Armstrong Flight
Research Center (AFRC)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
White Sands Test Facility
(managed by JSC)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC)
Johnson Space Center (JSC)
Michoud Assembly Facility
NASA center
(managed by MSFC)
NASA Shared Services Center
NASA supporting facility
(managed by SSC)
Stennis Space Center (SSC)
Federally funded research
and development center
The NASA workforce of 17,814¹ civil servants is dis-
The Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate
tributed at its Centers, facilities, and Headquarters
(ARMD) conducts research to advance the safety,
(see the figure below). A contractor workforce
capacity, and efficiency of the air transportation
supports each location by providing technical and
system, reduce emissions, and sustain U.S. techno-
business operations services.
logical leadership in the aviation industry.
NASA's Organizational Structure
The Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD)
invests in transformational technologies that help
The innovative, responsive, and dynamic nature
offset future mission risk, reduce cost, advance
of NASA's work benefits from our highly lever-
capabilities that enable NASA's missions, and
aged relationships with and between Mission
support space industry growth and high-quality job
Directorates, Mission Support Offices, and Centers.
creation. STMD identifies and promotes research
This organizational model ensures that our leaders
and technology development, demonstrates appli-
can take both a holistic and more narrowly focused
cability, and supports the infusion of these technol-
approach to programmatic, operational, business,
ogies into NASA's exploration and science missions
and safety management. The Administrator and
as well as commercial space activities.
senior officials lead NASA by providing top-level
strategy, policy, and direction. NASA's Office of the
The Science Mission Directorate (SMD) conducts
Chief Financial Officer leads the Agency's budget
scientific exploration enabled by observatories that
development, execution, and organization-wide
view Earth from space, observe, and visit other
performance management activities.
bodies in the solar system, and gaze out into the
galaxy and beyond. NASA's science programs focus
Mission Directorates and Mission Support Offices
on three interdisciplinary objectives: discovering
at Headquarters manage decisions on program-
the secrets of the universe, searching for life in the
matic investments and guide operations of the
solar system and beyond, and safeguarding and
Centers (see organizational structure below).
improving life on Earth.
Provided below are brief descriptions of NASA's
Mission Directorates and select offices.
1 NASA Workforce Profile, Workforce Information Cubes for
NASA (WICN). Last updated February 12, 2022.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
28
Organized for Success and Sustainability
The Exploration Systems Development Mission
The Mission Support Directorate (MSD) enables
Directorate (ESDMD)² defines and manages
the Agency's missions by managing institutional
the systems development for programs criti-
services, capabilities, and critical mission support
cal to the Artemis lunar exploration initiatives.
resources. MSD is actively reducing institutional
ESDMD is responsible for developing the Space
risk to NASA's current and future missions by
Launch System, the Orion spacecraft, and
improving processes, stimulating efficiency, and
Exploration Ground Systems. ESDMD also is
providing consistency and uniformity across institu-
responsible for developing technologies and capa-
tional standards and practices.
bilities to support sustainable human deep space
exploration.
NASA's best asset for achieving mission success is
a diverse, multidisciplinary, and skilled workforce
The Space Operations Mission Directorate
across all centers and facilities. NASA's approach to
(SOMD) focuses on launch and space operations,
performance management is based on the prem-
including launch services, space communica-
ise that each team member brings unique experi-
tions and navigation, and eventually, sustaining
ence and important expertise to projects. NASA is
operations on and around the Moon. SOMD also
committed to nurturing an organizational culture in
manages the International Space Station (ISS) and
which individuals make full use of their time, talent,
commercial space capability development and
and opportunities to pursue the highest standards
on-going operations, such as commercial crew
in engineering, research, operations, and manage-
and cargo flights and the program to develop the
ment.
commercial space stations that will replace the ISS.
2 At the beginning of FY 2022, the Human Exploration and Op-
erations Mission Directorate was divided into the Exploration
Systems Development Mission Directorate and the Space Oper-
ations Mission Directorate.
NASA Organization
Administrator
Advisory Groups-
Chief Financial
NAC & ASAP
"
Officer
Deputy Administrator
Associate Administrator
Office of Technology,
Policy and Strategy
I
Chief Information
Inspector General
Officer
Chief, Safety &
Diversity & Equal
Small Business
Chief Engineer
Mission Assurance
Opportunity
Programs
Chief Scientist/
Chief, Health &
Senior Climate
Communications
Medical Officer
STEM Engagement
Advisor
International
Legislative &
Exploration Systems
Ames Research
Johnson Space
Aeronatics Research
& Interagency
Intergovernmental
Development Mission
Center
Center
Mission Directorate
Relations
Affairs
Directorate*
Armstrong Flight
Kennedy Space
Research Center
Center
Science Mission
Space Operations
General Counsel
Directorate
Mission Directorate*
Glenn Research
Langley Research
Center
Center
Space Technology
Mission Support
Goddard Flight
Marshall Space
Mission Directorate
Directorate
Research Center
Flight Center
Jet Propulsion
Stennis Space Center
Laboratory**
*The Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate reorganized into two Mission Directorates at the beginning of FY 2022
**JPL is a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) managed by the NASA Office of JPL Management and Oversight
Dotted lines indicate independent advisory or oversight organizations
NASA Advisory Council (NAC)
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP)
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
29
Part 2
Performance Planning and
Reporting
NASA's Ingenuity helicopter unlocked its rotor blades, allowing them to spin freely, on April 7, 2021, the 47th Martian day, or sol, of the Mars Perseverance
mission. They had been held in place since before launch, and the unlocking is one of several milestones that needed to be met before the helicopter
attempted the first powered, controlled flight on another planet. This image was captured by the Mastcam-Z imager on NASA's Perseverance Mars rover on
the following sol, April 8. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
NASA's assessment of performance progress against the NASA 2018 Strategic Plan concluded at the end of FY
2021. Below is a summary of Performance Goal ratings for FY 2020-2021.
Beginning in FY 2022 and for the following three fiscal years, NASA's performance will support the strate-
gy-performance-evidence framework in the NASA 2022 Strategic Plan.
Summary of Performance Goal Ratings by Strategic Goal, FY 2020 and FY 2021
(NASA 2018 Strategic Plan Framework)
100%
1
1
1
2
2
90%
3
1
1
2
1
80%
3
1
70%
60%
50%
2
11
13
40%
14
9
3
15
9
30%
20%
10%
1
0%
FY 2020 FY 2021
FY 2020 FY 2021
FY 2020 FY 2021
FY 2020 FY 2021
Strategic Goal 1
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Goal 4
54
NHPC
CHDR
M20
MRO
THE
34
A
MAP
UTC 109/09:39:
Above: Members of NASA's Ingenuity helicopter team in the Space Flight Operations Facility at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory prepare to receive the
data downlink showing whether the helicopter completed its first flight on April 19, 2021. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
31
O
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal
Expand human knowledge through new
scientific discoveries.
Top: This view of Jupiter's turbulent atmosphere from NASA's Juno spacecraft includes several of the planet's southern jet streams. Using data from Juno's
instruments, scientists discovered that Jupiter's powerful atmospheric jet streams extend far deeper than previously imagined. Evidence from Juno shows
the jet streams and belts penetrate about 1,800 miles (3,000 kilometers) down into the planet. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS
Bottom: This image from NASA's Juno mission captures the northern hemisphere of Jupiter around the region known as Jet N7. The planet's strong winds
create the many swirling storms visible near the top of its atmosphere. Data from Juno helped scientists discover another, less visible effect of those winds:
Jupiter's powerful magnetic field changes over time. The winds extend more than 1800 miles (3000 kilometers) deep, where the material lower in Jupiter's
atmosphere is highly conductive, electrically. Scientists determined that the wind shears this conductive material apart and carries it around the planet, which
changes the shape of the magnetic field. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS
DISCOVER
Strategic Objective 1.1
Understand the Earth system and its climate.
LEAD OFFICE
knowledge about the Earth system is more press-
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
ing than ever. NASA is a world leader in the pro-
GOAL LEADER
duction of data necessary to understand, model,
Karen Flynn, Deputy Associate Administrator for
monitor, and ultimately predict climate and
Management, SMD
environmental change. NASA is the only organi-
zation in the world with an integrated end-to-end
Budget
program in Earth-observing mission development,
FY
$M
launch, operations, technology, research, data
systems, and applications.
Op Plan
2021
$1,627.9
NASA's measurements and predictive models pro-
Requested
2022
$1,832.1
vide information for decision makers and orga-
Requested
2023
$1,967.2
nizations that work with communities affected
by the impacts of changing climate, including
Outyear
2024
$1,971.8
information regarding the efficacy of policies and
2025
$2,102.4
decisions that help the United States and others
adapt and thrive on our changing planet. NASA
2026
$2,216.4
also works with international partner satellites;
2027
$2,257.2
data from airborne, ship-based, and ground net-
work instrumentation; and outputs from opera-
Earth's changing environment impacts every
tional weather models from National Oceanic and
aspect of life on our planet and has profound
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and other
implications on society and our Nation's well-be-
meteorological agencies. NASA integrates and
ing. Climate adaptation and mitigation efforts
harnesses these disparate data sources, enabling
cannot succeed without robust climate observa-
scientists to investigate and solve large questions
tions and research. As the impacts of global cli-
that cannot be addressed using data from only a
mate change become more numerous and acute,
single mission or spaceborne instrument.
the demand for accurate, timely, and actionable
Below: Vice President Kamala Harris gives remarks in front of the Space Environment Simulator (SES). Harris underscored how the United States is har-
nessing one of the Nations' most powerful tools - our space program - to combat the climate crisis and protect vulnerable communities. Image Credit:
NASA/Taylor Mickal
OFTTE
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.1.1: Demonstrate progress in characterizing the behavior of the Earth
system, including its various components and the naturally occurring and
human-induced forcings that act upon it.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
expert review determination of contributing programs,
missions, and research.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Significant
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Target
progress
1
1
demonstrated
Demonstrated
Achieved
as planned in 2
demonstrated for the first time that a spaceborne
areas
altimeter system can measure summer melt fea-
Rating
Green
Green
tures on sea ice from. They showed that ICESat-2
can provide highly precise measurements, resolv-
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
ing features as narrow as 7 meters and achieving
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
a vertical height precision of 0.01 meter, of sea ice
surface roughness; the height of ridges created by
Areas contributing to performance goal in FY 2021
buckling or lateral pressure; and sea ice floe size
1. Annual external expert review of programs, mis-
distribution. Another study used ICESat-2 data and
sions, and published, peer-reviewed research con-
coincident high-resolution satellite imagery from
tributing to Performance Goal 1.1.8.
the European Space Agency's (ESA's) WorldView-2
2.
Complete Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
and Sentinel-2 over different sea ice topographies
Follow-On (GRACE-FO) mission success criteria.
to locate individual melt ponds on Arctic sea ice
during the summer months. Sea ice melt ponds
Areas for FY 2022
reduce both the reflective and insulative properties
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
of sea ice, so determining their locations on sea ice
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
is a critical observation for accurately calculating
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
sea ice height and sea ice freeboard (i.e., the thick-
to Performance Goal 1.1.1.
ness of sea ice protruding above the water level).
Areas for FY 2023
While the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO)-2
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
spacecraft retrieves data in regularly repeating,
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
narrow swaths, the OCO-3 instrument aboard the
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
to Performance Goal 1.1.1.
International Space Station (ISS) can do multiple
swaths over selected regions. A team of investiga-
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.8 under the
tors are the first to describe results of the OCO-3
NASA 2018 Strategic Plan.
special sampling, snapshot-area maps, which
collect detailed spatial information on carbon
FY 2021 Performance Progress
dioxide over regions on the scale of about 50 miles
The Earth Science Advisory Committee determined
by 50 miles. For example, the snapshot-area maps
on November 4, 2021, that NASA achieved the FY
highlighted the carbon dioxide enhancements-
2021 target for this multiyear Performance Goal.
typically about 2 parts per million-over Los
Below are examples of scientific progress reported
Angeles relative to desert regions to the northeast.
in FY 2021.
Variations in the wind speed and direction largely
explain variations in the magnitude and location
The Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite
of enhancements. The work also highlighted that
(ICESat)-2 carries a single instrument, the Advanced
OCO-3 snapshot-area maps observe about three
Topographic Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS), that
times the emissions from the city as compared to
measures sea ice thickness and ice sheet ele-
the OCO-2 validation sampling over the region.
vation by timing the travel of laser pulses from
the satellite to Earth's surface. A research team
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
34
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
Less than half of Earth's 1,400 subaerial (existing
in open air) volcanoes have ground monitor-
ing because of practical limitations, especially
at remote or heavily vegetated volcanoes.
Researchers developed the first archive of both
satellite and ground-based seismic, deforma-
tion, degassing, and thermal data to quantify the
amount of detectable volcanic activity in the United
States and its territories. The researchers found
that 96 volcanoes in the United States showed
some type of volcanic activity, including thermal
activity at 30 volcanoes newly identified from
analysis by the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal
Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER)
sensor. Researchers also used the Multi-angle
Imaging SpectroRadiometer (MISR), the Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS),
and the Ozone Measuring Instrument (OMI) to
classify and track volcanic emissions from Icelandic
volcanoes based on content and ash particle size.
They used these data to illustrate the potential
to distinguish qualitative differences in eruptive
magma composition based on particle light absorp-
tion and plume profile from remote sensing.
Human activities releasing greenhouse gases
and aerosols into the atmosphere disrupt Earth's
energy balance between absorbed sunlight and
emitted thermal radiative energy, with a net effect
of causing Earth's surface and atmosphere to
warm. The additional energy being added to the
system by humans, previously estimated by mod-
els, has now been inferred by researchers using
16 years of measurements from the Clouds and
the Earth's Radiant Energy System (CERES) and
Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) instruments
aboard the Aqua satellite. They used a new tech-
nique to parse out how much of the total energy
change is caused by humans, finding that 0.5 Watts
per square meter of energy were added between
2003 and 2018, primarily because of anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions from such processes as
power generation, transport, and industrial manu-
facturing, and secondarily because of reduction in
reflective aerosols.
Above: A research team studied California's Tulare Basin, part of the
Central Valley, and found that the key to distinguishing between under-
During FY 2021, NASA completed the mission suc-
ground sources of water relates to patterns of sinking and rising ground
cess criteria for the Gravity Recovery and Climate
levels in this heavily irrigated agricultural region. They attacked the prob-
lem by combining data on water loss from J.S.-European Gravity Recovery
Experiment Follow On (GRACE-FO), which measures
and Climate Experiment (GRACE) and GRACE Follow-On satellites with
variations in gravity over Earth's surface caused by
data on ground-level changes from an ESA Sentinel-1 satellite. This map
the constant redistribution of mass.
shows changes in the mass of water, both above ground and underground,
in California from 2003 to 2013, as measured by NASA's GRACE satellite.
The darkest red indicates the greatest water loss. The Central Valley is out-
lined in yellow; the Tulare Basin covers about the southern third. Extreme
groundwater depletion has continued to the present. Image Credit: NASA/
GSFC/SVS
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
35
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.1.2: Demonstrate progress in enhancing understanding of the interacting
processes that control the behavior of Earth system, and in utilizing the
enhanced knowledge to improve predictive capability.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
expert review determination of contributing programs,
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
missions, and research.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Significant
Target
progress
1
1
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
demonstrated
Significant
Achieved
progress
demonstrated in
Researchers studied how to improve forecasts
3 areas
of flooding in the Northern Great Plains of North
Rating
Green
Green
America. This region is flat and has soil that does
not readily drain away water. It also receives a lot
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
of snow, and in the spring, a sharp rise in tempera-
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
ture can quickly melt the snow and cause flooding
for communities that lie near rivers. To better
List of areas for external review panel determination in
forecast floods like this, researchers used 2002-
FY 2021
2011 data from the Advanced Microwave Scanning
1. Annual external expert review of programs, mis-
Radiometer for EOS (AMSR-E) aboard the Aqua
sions, and published, peer-reviewed research con-
satellite to better estimate the amount of snowfall
tributing to Performance Goal 1.1.9.
that often occur at weather stations in windy areas.
2.
40% of Earth science applications projects advancing
By linking snow water equivalent to the streamfall
one Applications Readiness Level (ARL) with 3 proj-
in rivers, these adjustments improved the model
ects advance to ARL 8 or 9.
estimates of streamflow.
3. Customer satisfaction rating for the Earth Observing
System Data and Information System (EOSDIS)
Human activities have large impacts on ecosystems
exceeds the most recently available Federal
and associated biogeochemical cycles, especially
Government average rating of the American
when coupled with natural processes. A recent
Customer Satisfaction Index.
study estimated that although woody plants in
Areas for FY 2022
forested savannahs globally are responsible for
1.
80 percent of the land carbon sink, human-in-
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
duced deforestation releases back into the atmo-
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
sphere an amount of carbon equal to about half
to Performance Goal 1.1.2.
of that emitted by burning of fossil fuels each
year. However, replanting trees and reestablishing
Areas for FY 2023
forests can offset a portion of these emissions.
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
Another study leveraged a time series of MODIS
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
data in conjunction with a carbon bookkeeping
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
model to assess the impacts of land use/land cover
to Performance Goal 1.1.2.
change on carbon emissions in the Mekong River
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.9 under the
Basin from 2001 to 2019. They found that the larg-
2018 Strategic Plan.
est components of land use/land cover change in
the region are the establishment of plantations and
FY 2021 Performance Progress
agricultural expansion in previously forested areas.
Although this land use conversion released car-
The Earth Science Advisory Committee determined
bon, carbon uptake from the establishment of new
on November 4, 2021, that NASA achieved the FY
plantations offset almost half of those emissions,
2021 target for this multiyear Performance Goal.
indicating that the assessment of post-deforesta-
Below are examples of scientific progress reported
tion land use is crucial for quantifying the short-
in FY 2021.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
36
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
and longer-term carbon consequences of land use/
prompted four rapid response projects to improve
land cover change.
future hurricane/flood activations and decision
support.
Satellite multi-sensor precipitation products
(SMPPs) fill in precipitation data for various appli-
Users indicated continued satisfaction with NASA's
cations where surface rain gauge data are not
Earth Observing System Data and Information
sufficient. However, uncertainty in the accuracy
System (EOSDIS), as determined by the American
of SMPPs has hampered such use. Researchers
Customer Satisfaction Index (ASCI) survey. The 2021
demonstrated how considering the uncertainty in
score improved slightly from already high levels as
SMPPs can improve predictions from a landslide
the data system continues to improve and evolve.
hazard model over the mountainous southeastern
The ACSI is a leading national indicator of customer
United States. They developed an error formulation
satisfaction for more than 300 companies in 43
using coincident data from the Integrated Multi-
industries and 10 economic sectors, including the
satellite Retrievals for GPM (IMERG) mission and
U.S. Federal Government.
ground-based gauge precipitation data and input to
a probabilistic version of NASA's Landslide Hazard
Assessment for Situational Awareness (LHASA)
model. The additional uncertainty information
allowed the probabilistic LHASA model to forecast
more landslides than the existing deterministic ver-
sion, particularly in high hazard nowcast categories.
During FY 2021, 64 of 90 Applied Sciences projects
(71 percent) advanced at least one ARL, with nine
achieving ARL 8 or 9. NASA uses ARL to track and
manage the development, testing, validation, and
integration of applications. ARL-1 is the level at
which basic scientific concepts provide the basis
for application ideas, and ARL-9 indicates that an
application is approved for operational deployment
and integration into a partner's system.
To support disaster preparedness and resiliency,
the Applied Sciences Disasters program targeted
over 300 partner organizations to strengthen rela-
tionships, with Disaster Assistance Response and
Resilience Teams supporting four exercises and 46
activations (10 domestic, 36 international) to help
exposed and vulnerable communities. In FY 2021,
the program posted more than 2,500 data prod-
ucts on the NASA Disasters Mapping Portal. For a
combination of perils including tropical cyclones,
volcanoes, flooding, and wildfires, this provided
increased situational awareness for key partners
including the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), the U.S. Agency for International
Above: The BurnEx drill is an opportunity for first responders to practice
Development's (USAID's) Bureau of Humanitarian
their craft and try out new techniques, and for the first time in one of these
Affairs, The World Food Programme, and The
exercises, NASA was in the room too. BurnEx, which took place on June
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
8-10, 2021, included prominent wildfire response organizations including
Crescent Societies. An example of these efforts is
the California National Guard, CAL FIRE and the California State Guard.
The prescribed burn happened at Camp Pendleton, California. In the
NASA's contribution to the Hurricane Ida response,
photo Brady Helms (center), disaster management coordinator with NASA
for which data products fully integrated and avail-
Applied Sciences Disasters program, shows California National Guard
able on both NASA's Portal and the FEMA National
Incident Awareness and Assessment Chief Warrant Officer, Mark Johnson
Response Coordination Center website were used
(left), and Private First Class, Pio Tuban (right), the model output created
in real-time by FEMA's Region IV and their inter-
for the exercise from NASA research activity. Image credits: California
agency and state partners. Lessons learned also
Guard Joint Forces Headquarters Public Affairs/SSG Kimberly Hill
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
37
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.1.3: Achieve critical milestones for the Science Mission Directorate's Earth
system major projects.
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
Number of critical milestones completed.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Target
10
12
At least 3 of 4
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
8
15
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Achieved
Rating
Yellow
Green
6.
Complete the Mars Sample Return mission Key
Decision Point (KDP)-A review.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
7.
Complete the Double Asteroid Redirection Test
Green
Green
Yellow
Green
Green
(DART) mission Pre-Ship Review (PSR).
8.
List of critical milestones for FY 2022
Complete the Europa Clipper mission Critical Design
Review (CDR).
1. Complete Sentinel-6B mission Pre-Storage Review.
9.
Complete the Psyche mission System Integration
2. Complete the Surface Water and Ocean Topography
Review (SIR).
(SWOT) mission Operational Readiness Review (ORR).
10. Complete the Lucy mission Pre-Environmenta
3.
Deliver the NASA-Indian Space Research
Review (PER).
Organisation (ISRO) Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR)
Radar Antenna Boom integration and alignment
11. Complete one Dragonfly Mobility radar and lidar
onto the Radar Structure.
performance characterization tests.
4.
Initiate the Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean
12. Complete the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration
Ecosystem (PACE) Observatory Integration and Test
Probe (IMAP) Preliminary Design Review (PDR).
(I&T).
13. Complete the Spectro-Photometer for the History
of the Universe, Epoch of Reionization and Ices
List of critical milestones for FY 2023
Explorer (SPHEREx) Key Decision Point (KDP)-C
review.
1. Complete the NASA-Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR)
14. Complete the two Nancy Grace Roman Space
mission TBD.
Telescope instrument Critical Design Reviews (CDRs).
2. Complete the Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean
15. Complete the Volatiles Investigating Polar
Ecosystem (PACE) mission Key Decision Point (KDP)-D
Exploration Rover (VIPER) mission Key Decision Point
review.
(KDP)-C review.
3. Launch the Tropospheric Emissions: Monitoring
FY 2021 Performance Progress
Pollution (TEMPO) mission.
4.
Deliver the Geostationary Carbon Observatory
NASA achieved 8 of the 12 milestones planned for
(GeoCarb) mission instrument.
FY 2021. Beginning in April 2020, NASA and its part-
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.10 under
ners limited hands-on work to prioritized projects,
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
following health guidance from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, to help protect
1.1.10: Achieve critical milestones of Science
the workforce from COVID-19 impacts. As a result
Mission Directorate major projects
of the change of operations, some projects did
not achieve their milestones. NASA delayed the
List of major projects critical milestones FY 2021
SPHEREx KDP-C review to the first quarter of FY
1. Launch Sentinel-6A.
2021 due to COVID-19 impacts and the loss of the
2.
Complete the Landsat 9 Pre-Ship Review (PSR).
originally selected telescope vendor. The SIRs for
3.
Initiate Surface Water and Ocean Topography
SWOT and NISAR also were delayed until FY 2021
(SWOT) mission Observatory Integration and Testing
due to COVID-19 impacts. In addition, the Europa
(I&T).
Clipper CDR was postponed to December 2020 due
4. Initiate the Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean
to delays in finalization of the launch vehicle selec-
Ecosystem (PACE) mission spacecraft element
tion for the mission and the associated uncertain-
Integration and Testing (I&T).
ties in the design of launch vehicle-specific mission
5.
Land the Mars 2020 rover in the Jezero Crater, com-
elements.
plete checkout, and begin surface operations.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
38
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
The Lucy CDR was completed in October 2019
and the KDP-B review for IMAP was completed
in January 2020. NASA awarded the second CLPS
mission task order in April. The Psyche CDR and
Landsat-9 KDP-D review were completed in May,
and the KDP-D review for the DART mission and
the Flight Acceptance Review, now referred to
as the Qualification and Acceptance Review, for
Sentinal-6 Michael Freilich were in July. Mars 2020
Perseverance launched on July 2020 on its way to
the Red Planet. (Watch the launch on YouTube.)
Below: Technicians attach the Landsat 9 spacecraft to the evolved expendable vehicle secondary payload adapter (ESPA) inside the Vertical Integration
Facility
at Vandenberg Space Force Base in California on August 11, 2021. The ESPA connects Landsat 9 and the payload adapter (PMA). The PMA then
will attach to the second stage of a United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket. Landsat 9 launched on September 27, 2021. Photo credit: NASA/Randy Beaudoin
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
39
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.1.4: Use the vantage point of space, airborne, and surface observations to
advance our understanding of the Earth system, its processes, and changing
climate. (Agency Priority Goal)
Number of critical milestones completed.
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
entific understanding of our planet, other
Year
(APG)
(APG)
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Target
N/A
N/A
5
4
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Achieved
N/A
N/A
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Rating
N/A
N/A
List of critical milestones for FY 2022
1. Release Landsat first light images.
2.
Competitively select Earth Venture Mission (EVM)-3.
3.
Release Equity and Environmental Justice research
opportunity solicitation.
4.
Deliver Earth Surface Mineral Dust Source
Investigation (EMIT) for launch on the International
Space Station (ISS).
5.
Initiate Phase A for at least two of Earth System
Observatory missions addressing four designated
observables from the 2017 Decadal (Atmosphere;
Clouds, Convection, and Precipitation; Surface
Biology and Geology; and Mass Change).
List of critical milestones for FY 2023
1. Develop and release Version 4 of the NASA GISS
Model E Earth system model.
2.
Complete the Libera Critical Design Review (CDR).
3. Launch the Surface Water Ocean Topography
(SWOT) mission.
4. Deliver Polar Radiant Energy in the Far InfraRed
Experiment (PREFIRE) CubeSats.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
40
DISCOVER
Strategic Objective 1.2
Understand the Sun, solar system, and universe.
LEAD OFFICE
Astrophysics is humanity's scientific quest to dis-
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
cover the origin of the universe and of life itself.
GOAL LEADER
How does the universe work? How did we get
Karen Flynn, Deputy Associate Administrator for
here? Are we alone? Progress is advanced through
Management, SMD
the combination of basic research and flight
missions. Astrophysics is guided by the Pathways
Budget
to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the
FY
$M
2020s (Astro2020) decadal survey, which identifies
science goals and recommendations for astro-
Op Plan
2021
$5,294.2
physics planning and investment for the next
2022
$5,681.4
decade. Basic research uses the data from our
Requested
missions to create new knowledge and advance
Requested
2023
$5,576.8
our understanding of the universe.
2024
$5,687.8
Through the observation and discovery of com-
2025
$5,722.1
plex planetary worlds and objects, we seek to
Outyear
understand our solar system and the distribution
2026
$5,755.1
of life within it. The focus of planetary science is to
2027
$5,864.8
advance scientific knowledge of the origin and his-
tory of the solar system, the potential for life else-
where, and the hazards and resources present as
Below: Perseverance looks back with one of its navigation cameras toward its tracks on July 1, 2021 (the 130th sol, or Martian day, of its mission), after
driving autonomously 358 feet (109 meters) - its longest autonomous drive to date. The image has been processed to enhance the contrast. Image Credit:
NASA/JPL-Caltech
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
humans explore space. The scientific foundation
of this endeavor is the Origins, Worlds, and Life: A
Decadal Survey for Planetary Science and Astrobiology
2023-2032. NASA manages a diverse portfolio of
research and technology development and unique
mission investigations.
Advances in planetary science, coupled with leading
efforts to detect, track, and characterize near-Earth
objects, will continue to improve planetary defense.
Biological and physical sciences pioneers scientific
discovery and enables space exploration by using
the spaceflight environment, in and beyond low
Earth orbit, to conduct experiments that cannot be
done on Earth. This work focuses on transforma-
tive science to contribute to advances in science,
technology, and space exploration. NASA strives for
broad involvement of the research and technology
development communities in the formulation and
dissemination of its work.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
42
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.1: Demonstrate progress in exploring and advancing understanding of the
physical processes and connections of the Sun, space, and planetary environ-
ments throughout the solar system.
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual ex-
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
ternal expert review determination of contributing
entific understanding of our planet, other
programs, missions, and research.
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Significant
Target
progress
2
1
demonstrated
New studies from the Magnetospheric Multiscale
Demonstrated
Achieved
(MMS) mission of charged particle acceleration
as planned
by magnetic reconnection and by the Interface
Rating
Green
Green
Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) and the Solar
Dynamics Observatory (SDO) of nanoflares embed-
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
ded within flaring regions are important for under-
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
standing charged particle acceleration in solar
flares and planetary magnetospheres throughout
Areas contributing to performance goal in FY 2022
the solar system and the universe.
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
NASA's lonospheric Connection Explorer (ICON)
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
mission is providing new insights into how neutral
to Performance Goal 1.2.1.
winds drive the currents that form the equatorial
2. Complete the Parker Solar Probe (PSP) mission suc-
electrojet, crucial to improving understanding and
cess criteria.
modeling of thermosphere-ionosphere coupling
and equatorial space weather.
Areas contributing to performance goal in FY 2023
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
The Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) observed
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
spatial/temporal variability in the Martian thermo-
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
sphere density due to solar tides that also have
to Performance Goal 1.2.1.
important implications for variability in the ther-
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.1 under the 2018
mosphere at Earth. Seeing the effects of the same
Strategic Plan.
physical process in two very different planetary
atmospheres provides deeper understanding of
FY 2021 Performance Progress
how one physical process couples to others and
leads to better atmospheric models at both Earth
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multiyear
and Mars.
Performance Goal, as determined by the assess-
ment of progress led by the Heliophysics Advisory
The signatures of extrasolar planets can be masked
Committee in October 2021. Below are examples of
by stellar irradiance variability associated with
scientific progress reported in FY 2021. The selected
magnetic activity cycles. Earth Science missions
results demonstrate significant progress in our
are contributing to the interpretation of mea-
understanding of the inter-connections shaping the
surements conducted in the search for extrasolar
space environment at Earth, at Mars, in interstellar
planets. Using the Sun as a viable template, daily
space, and in the vicinity of exoplanets.
full-disk solar observations from NASA's Aura
Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI) and the Dutch
A full solar cycle of energetic neutral atom flux
Tropospheric Monitoring Instrument (TROPOMI)
observations (a way to image otherwise invisible
resulted in both new information about the sources
neutral atoms) from the outer heliosphere by the
of variability in selected solar lines and a valuable
Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) have made
data set for future progress.
possible the construction of a 3D map of the helio-
sphere, the bubble that describes the extent of our
Citizen science recently identified a new form of
Sun's influence.
aurora called the "dunes," contributing to lead-
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
43
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
ing-edge discoveries in heliophysics. Observations
from NASA's Thermosphere-lonosphere-
Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED)
mission were critical to developing a theory to
explain the dune-like structure as the result of an
atmospheric wave known as a mesospheric bore.
Carth Scale
Magnetic Reconnection
AIA 131À ~10,000,000°C
IRIS 1400À -50,000°C
Heating & Brightening
Unsharp Masked
Above: Solar flares range in size from nanoflares to giant eruptive flares. Each inset frame zooms in to the selected region in the frame to its left. The frame
on the far right is the most zoomed in, showing the putative nanoflare. Image Credit: NASA/SDO/IRIS/Shah Bahauddin
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
44
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.2: Demonstrate progress in exploring and probing the origin, evolution,
and destiny of the galaxies, stars, and planets that make up the universe.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
expert review determination of contributing programs,
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
missions, and research.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Significant
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Target
progress
1
1
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
demonstrated
Significant
Achieved
progress
two of XMM-Newton key instruments and funds
demonstrated
the Guest Observer Facility at our Goddard Space
Rating
Green
Green
Flight Center in Maryland. The Juno spacecraft,
heading to Jupiter, provided the first radial profile
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
of interplanetary dust (as small as a few microns)
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
and determined it came from Mars. Astronomers
have long thought that dust is brought into the
Areas for FY 2022
inner solar system by asteroids and comets, but
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
Juno data shows the dust in the Martian orbit plane
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
could contribute, too. This dust distribution solves
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
the mystery of Zodiacal Light. This work will impact
to Performance Goal 1.2.2.
our understanding and interpretation of zodiacal
emission and solar system dust, to be studied by
Areas for FY 2023
future NASA exoplanet missions that explore the
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
process of planet building.
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
A new type of supernova, 2018zd, discovered
to Performance Goal 1.2.2.
using Hubble Space Telescope and Spitzer Space
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.2 under the
Telescope data, has shown strong evidence of
2018 Strategic Plan.
being triggered by "electron capture," which is sus-
pected to occur for stars between 8 and 10 times
FY 2021 Performance Progress
the mass of the Sun. These stars are too massive
to expire as white dwarf stars, but too small to
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multi-year
undergo standard core-collapse supernova explo-
Performance Goal as determined by the assess-
sions. This discovery will provide scientists with
ment of progress led by the Astrophysics Advisory
a deeper understanding of the diversity of stellar
Committee in October 2021. Below are examples of
death.
scientific progress reported in FY 2021.
The Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array
(NuSTAR) and X-ray Multi-mirror Mission (XMM)-
Newton observations of X-ray emissions produced
by gas falling into a black hole, which is then
gravitationally bent by the black hole, enable for
the first time the study of processes on the far side
of the black hole and allow a three-dimensional
view. Observing photons bent around the black
hole confirms a key prediction of general relativity.
NuSTAR is a NASA mission developed in partner-
ship with the Danish Technical University (DTU)
and the Italian Space Agency (ASI). XMM-Newton
was built and launched by the European Space
Agency (ESA). NASA contributed resources for
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
45
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.3: Demonstrate progress in exploring, observing, and understanding
objects in the solar system in order to understand how they formed, operate,
interact, and evolve.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
expert review determination of contributing programs,
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
missions, and research.
entific understanding of our planet, other
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Significant
Target
progress
1
2
demonstrated
Significant
For two years, the Interior Exploration using
Achieved
progress
Seismic Investigations, Geodesy and Heat
demonstrated
Transport (InSight) lander has been recording
Rating
Green
Green
seismic activity on Mars to better understand the
planet's structure, thermochemical state, and
geologic history. Results from InSight demonstrate
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
that Mars is seismically active with plentiful mar-
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
squakes that are generally small in magnitude.
Areas for FY 2022
Initial data analysis reveals that Mars possesses a
24- to 72-kilometer-thick layered crust, with a 500
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
kilometer-deep lithosphere, the rocky outermost
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
part of Mars made up of the crust and mantle.
to Performance Goal 1.2.3.
Mars is surfaced by a crust enriched in radioactive
elements and contains a large, approximately 1,830
Areas for FY 2023
kilometer-wide core composed of iron-nickel that
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
is enriched in light elements and is at least partially
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
in a liquid state. These results point to a planetary
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
interior with general similarities to those of Earth,
to Performance Goal 1.2.3.
but one that followed a very different evolutionary
2. Complete the Origins, Spectral Interpretation,
path.
Resource Identification, Security-Regolith Explorer
(OSIRIS-REx) mission success criteria.
At the outer planets, scientists took a fresh look
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.3 under the
at images acquired by the Voyager 2 spacecraft in
2018 Strategic Plan.
light of other more recent discoveries. The data
revealed that the surfaces of the mid-sized Uranian
FY 2021 Performance Progress
moons exhibit geologic features that could have
been formed by cryovolcanism (where volcanoes
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multiyear
erupt liquids and vapor that freeze at the plane-
Performance Goal as determined by an assess-
tary surface), hinting at ocean world activity, now
ment of progress led by the Planetary Advisory
or in the past. Ammonia is an efficient anti-freeze
Committee in October 2021. Below are examples of
agent that is associated with cryovolcanic depos-
scientific progress reported in FY 2021. The selected
its and processes on confirmed ocean worlds
results represent a breadth of accomplishment in
like Enceladus and Ceres. Using NASA's Infrared
exploring, observing, and understanding objects
Telescope Facility, a team detected a 2.2-m band
in the solar system and how they formed, as well
on Ariel and the other Uranian moons that is
as how they continue to operate, interact, and
consistent with the presence of ammonia-bearing
evolve. These selected results also demonstrate
species, supporting the photogeologic evidence for
that high-impact science comes not just from newly
cryovolcanism on the Uranian moons.
collected observations, but also from continued
assessment of data collected decades ago.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
46
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.4: Demonstrate progress in discovering and studying planets around other
stars.
NASA portfolio areas assessed, guided by an annual
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
external expert review of progress made by contributing
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
programs, missions, and research.
entific understanding of our planet, other
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Significant
Target
progress
1
1
demonstrated
Significant
white dwarfs (the Sun will evolve into such an
progress
object after it exhausts its nuclear fuel in about
Achieved
demonstrated in
5 billion years), the remnant core of a gas giant
1 area
whose atmosphere has been stripped away, and
Rating
Green
Green
many more.
A newly published catalogue of TESS exoplanets
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
will enable astronomers to study exoplanet demo-
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
graphics. This TESS catalog builds on the remark-
able results from the earlier Kepler mission, which
Areas for external review panel determination in FY 2021
detected the first large population of exoplanets.
1. Annual external expert review determination of
TESS has discovered planets across the whole sky,
programs, missions, and published, peer-reviewed
research contributing to Performance Goal 1.1.4.
and around stars nearby to the Sun, providing tar-
2.
Complete Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS)
get lists for future follow-up with the James Webb
mission success criteria.
Space Telescope and other facilities.
Areas for FY 2022
The Hubble Space Telescope directly measured the
mass growth rate of exoplanet PDS 70b by observ-
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
ing radiation from extremely hot gas falling onto
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
the planet. The massive, Jupiter-sized world orbit-
to Performance Goal 1.2.4.
ing at approximately the same distance as Uranus
does from the Sun, began forming approximately 5
Areas for FY 2023
million years ago, and may be in the tail end of its
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
formation process. This technique for using Hubble
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
to directly image this planet paves a new route
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
for further exoplanet research, especially during a
to Performance Goal 1.2.4.
planet's formative years.
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.4 under the
2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multi-year
Performance Goal as determined by the assess-
ment of progress led by the Astrophysics Advisory
Committee in October 2021. Below are examples of
scientific progress reported in FY 2021.
Discoveries made with the Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite (TESS) include an Earth-like planet
found in the liquid water zone of its host star,
several multi-planet systems (like our solar system),
planets orbiting binary stars, super-hot planets
extremely close to their host star, planets around
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
47
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
PDS 70
HST WFC3/UVIS
blocked starlight
F336W
F656N
Left: NASA's Hubble Space Telescope is giving astronomers a
rare look at a Jupiter-sized, still-forming planet that is feeding
off material surrounding a young star. This huge exoplanet,
designated PDS 70b, orbits the orange dwarf star PDS 70,
N.
which is already known to have two actively forming planets
PDS 70b
inside a huge disk of dust and gas encircling the star. Image
20AU
E
Credit: NASA, ESA, McDonald Observatory-University of
approx
distance of Uranus
Texas, Yifan Zhou (UT), Joseph DePasquale (STScl). Image
Credit: NASA
Illustratio
Above: In this artist's interpretation, researchers working with data from NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) have discovered
the
mission's
first circumbinary planet, a world orbiting two stars. The planet, called TOI 1338 b, is around 6.9 times larger than Earth, or between the sizes of Neptune
and Saturn. It lies in a system 1,300 light-years away in the constellation Pictor. Watch a video about this discovery [https://www.nasa.gov/tess-transiting-ex-
oplanet-survey-satellite). Image credit: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
48
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.5: Demonstrate progress in improving understanding of the origin and
evolution of life on Earth to guide the search for life elsewhere, exploring
and finding locations where life could have existed or could exist today, and
exploring whether planets around other stars could harbor life.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
expert review determination of contributing programs,
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
missions, and research.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Significant
Target
progress
1
1
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
demonstrated
Significant
Achieved
progress
iments at high pressure and temperature, as well
demonstrated
as modeling simulations, researchers have demon-
Rating
Green
Green
strated that an impact of a Mars-sized planet of
particular composition around the time of the
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Moon-forming event (5 to 10 million years after the
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
formation of the solar system) could be the source
of major volatiles on Earth.
Areas for FY 2022
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
The study of an extreme outburst, or flare, from
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
the Sun's nearest stellar neighbor, Proxima
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
Centauri, could help guide the search for life
to Performance Goal 1.2.5.
beyond our solar system. The flare was discov-
ered by a team of astronomers using the Hubble,
Areas for FY 2023
TESS, and ground-based telescopes that included
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
(ASKAP), Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
Array (ALMA), and the du Pont Telescope. Proxima
to Performance Goal 1.2.5.
Centauri is a "red dwarf" with about one-eighth
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.5 under the
the mass of our Sun. It sits just four light-years, or
2018 Strategic Plan.
almost 25 trillion miles, from the center of our solar
system and hosts at least two planets, one of which
FY 2021 Performance Progress
may look something like Earth. As the closest exo-
planet to Earth, and located in the star's Habitable
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multiyear
Zone, Proxima b is the most likely candidate for
Performance Goal as determined by an assessment
follow-up observations and astrobiological surveys.
of progress led by the Planetary Science Advisory
But according to this latest study, the flares its star
Committee in October 2021. Below are examples of
emits would have likely rendered the planet ster-
scientific progress reported in FY 2021.
ile a long time ago. The team's findings constitute
one of the most in-depth anatomies of a flare from
Earth's status as the only life-sustaining planet is a
any star in our galaxy. In the future, these signals
result of the timing and delivery mechanism of car-
could help researchers gather more information
bon, nitrogen, sulfur, and hydrogen. Determining
about how stars generate flares, which could have
the characteristics of the body or bodies that deliv-
immense implications for exoplanet and habitabil-
ered this material to early Earth is crucial. Based
ity studies.
on their isotopic signatures, terrestrial volatiles
(small molecules) are thought to have derived from
carbonaceous meteorites, while the isotopic com-
positions of nonvolatile major and trace elements
suggest that a different type of meteorite material
is the primary building blocks of Earth. Using exper-
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
49
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.6: Demonstrate progress in developing the capability to detect and
knowledge to predict extreme conditions in space to protect life and society
and to safeguard human and robotic explorers beyond Earth.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
expert review determination of contributing programs,
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
missions, and research.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Significant
Target
progress
2
2
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
demonstrated
Demonstrated
Achieved
as planned in 2
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.6 under the
areas
2018 Strategic Plan.
Rating
Green
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multiyear
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
Performance Goal as determined by the assess-
Areas for external review panel determination in FY 2021
ment of progress performed by the Heliophysics
1. Annual external expert review determination of
Advisory Committee in October 2021. Below are
programs, missions, and published, peer-reviewed
examples of scientific progress reported in FY
research contributing to Performance Goal 1.1.6.
2021. The studies highlighted directly address the
2. External expert review panel determination indicat-
extreme space weather events that have the poten-
ing whether expectations for research program have
tial to cause substantial harm to national security,
been fully met or exceeded in advancing scientific
the economy, and crewed and unmanned space
understanding of background solar wind, solar wind
activities and support better understanding of
structures, and coronal mass ejections, which can be
background solar wind, solar wind structures, and
integrated into key models used to predict the arrival
coronal mass ejections.
time and impact of space storms at Earth.
Geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) result
Areas for FY 2022
from geoelectric fields produced by space
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined
weather. GICs, which manifest at ground level,
by annual external expert review determination of
are a considerable risk to technological systems,
programs, missions, and published, peer-reviewed
like powerlines. A recent study using coordinated
research contributing to Performance Goal 1.2.6.
observations from the Time History of Events
2.
External expert review panel determination indicat-
and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms
ing whether expectations for research program have
been fully met or exceeded in advancing scientific
(THEMIS) mission, ground-based magnetome-
understanding of background solar wind, solar wind
ters, radars, and the Earthscope facility revealed
structures, and coronal mass ejections, which can be
the direct coupling of conditions in the magneto-
integrated into key models used to predict the arrival
tail-to-ground-level electromagnetic conditions.
time and impact of space storms at Earth.
Findings from the study are expected to lead to
better characterization and prediction of geoelec-
Areas for FY 2023
tric signals from ultra-low-frequency waves that can
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined
reach amplitudes that may cause intense geoelec-
by annual external expert review determination of
tric fields and GICs.
programs, missions, and published, peer-reviewed
research contributing to Performance Goal 1.2.6.
Solar energetic particles are the most hazardous
2.
External expert review panel determination indicat-
outputs from solar activity. Recent studies utiliz-
ing whether expectations for research program have
ing the Heliophysics System Observatory show
been fully met or exceeded in advancing scientific
the plasma composition of the most damaging
understanding of background solar wind, solar wind
solar energetic particles can be traced back to the
structures, and coronal mass ejections, which can be
integrated into key models used to predict the arrival
confined magnetic field environment in the Sun's
time and impact of space storms at Earth.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
50
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
lower atmosphere. The studies also confirm shock
acceleration as a major acceleration mechanism.
Changes in thermospheric mass density impact the
aerodynamic drag on space vehicles and debris in
the near-Earth space environments. Cooling of the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) results
in a decrease in its temperature and density, which
results in less aerodynamic drag and leads to
longer lifetimes for debris on orbit. A recent study
by the TIMED mission reveals that the MLT has
cooled dramatically since 2002 and suggests that
the MLT in 2020 was colder than at any other time
since the late 1700s. The long-term cooling effects
are attributed to increasing carbon dioxide due to
climate changes and weakening solar cycles.
Researchers have developed new methodologies
to understand coronal mass ejection propagation
using heliospheric images from the Solar Terrestrial
Relations Observatory (STEREO) mission, improv-
ing the capability to predict arrival time at Earth.
Furthermore, there has been significant progress
made in global integrated models of the solar
corona and heliosphere, in particular to under-
stand the build-up of magnetic energy that leads to
solar eruptive events.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
51
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.7: Demonstrate progress in identifying, characterizing, and predicting
objects in the solar system that pose threats to Earth or offer resources for
human exploration.
NASA portfolio assessment guided by an annual external
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
expert review determination of contributing programs,
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
missions, and research.
entific understanding of our planet, other
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Significant
Target
progress
2
3
demonstrated
Demonstrated
In this fiscal year, asteroid search teams funded
Achieved
as planned in 2
by NASA's Near-Earth Object Observations (NEOO)
areas
Program found another 5 asteroids larger than one
Rating
Green
Green
kilometer in size with orbits that can come within
Earth's vicinity. Asteroid search teams also found
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
3,039 smaller asteroids less than one kilometer
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
in size. This brings the total known population of
near-Earth asteroids to 26,907 as of September
Areas contributing to performance goal in FY 2021
30, 2021. The high-precision orbit predictions
1. Annual external expert review of programs, mis-
computed by the Center for Near-Earth Object
sions, and published, peer-reviewed research con-
Studies at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)
tributing to Performance Goal 1.1.7.
show that none of these objects is likely to strike
2. Identify and catalogue 9,750 near-Earth asteroids
Earth in the next century. However, 2,215 small
that are 140 meters in diameter or larger.
bodies (of which 162 are larger than one kilome-
ter in diameter), with 117 near-Earth comets, are
Areas contributing to performance goal in FY 2022
in orbits that could become a hazard in the more
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
distant future and warrant continued monitoring.
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
The NASA Authorization Act of 2005 directed NASA
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
to find 90 percent of the near-Earth objects down
to Performance Goal 1.2.7.
to 140 meters in size. As of September 30, 2021,
2.
Identify and catalogue 10,300 near-Earth asteroids
9,837 near-Earth asteroids with sizes greater than
that are 140 meters in diameter or larger.
140 meters have been discovered and catalogued,
Areas contributing to performance goal in FY 2023
exceeding the target of 9,750.
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
Asteroid 99942 Apophis, discovered in 2004, was
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
identified as one of the most hazardous asteroids
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
to Performance Goal 1.2.7.
that could impact Earth. Estimated to be about
2. Identify and catalogue 10,800 near-Earth asteroids
1,100 feet (340 meters) across, astronomers pre-
that are 140 meters in diameter or larger.
dicted that it would come uncomfortably close in
3. Complete the Double Asteroid Redirection Test
2029. Thanks to additional observations, the risk
(DART) mission success criteria.
of an impact in 2029 was later ruled out, as was
the potential impact risk posed by another close
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.7 under the
approach in 2036. However, the astronomers could
2018 Strategic Plan.
not rule out a small chance of impact in 2068.
During Apophis' distant flyby of Earth in March
FY 2021 Performance Progress
2021, astronomers took the opportunity to pre-
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multiyear
cisely track its motion and to refine the estimate
Performance Goal as determined by an assessment
of its orbit around the Sun with extreme precision,
of progress led by the Planetary Science Advisory
enabling scientists to confidently rule out any
Committee in October 2021. Below are examples of
impact risk in 2068 and long after. With the sup-
scientific progress reported in FY 2021.
port of recent optical observations and additional
radar observations, NASA scientists found that the
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
52
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
uncertainty in Apophis' orbit has collapsed from
hundreds of kilometers to just a handful of kilome-
ters when projected to 2029. This greatly improved
knowledge of its position in 2029 provided more
certainty of its future motion, so Apophis could be
removed from the risk list. On April 13, 2029, the
asteroid Apophis will pass less than 20,000 miles
(32,000 kilometers) from our planet's surface-
closer than the distance of geosynchronous satel-
lites.
Polymete Leucus
Eurybates
Wad 2
Ceres
Psyche
67P/Churyumov Gerasimenko
Mokawa
DART Lucy
Apopris
Tempel
Son
Mercary
Borrelly
Mais*
Bonakdiohanson
Didymos
Vesta
LIVE
DEC 01, 2021
08:36:01 am
C
Annetrank
With NASA's Eyes on Asteroids, you can watch all the known near-Earth asteroids and comets as they orbit the Sun. Updated twice daily with the latest
tracking data, the web-based application will automatically add new near-Earth object discoveries for you to explore. Image credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
53
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.8: Demonstrate progress in understanding the properties of physical and
biological systems in spaceflight environments to advance scientific knowl-
edge, enable space exploration, and benefit life on Earth.
NASA portfolio areas assessed, guided by an annual
external expert review of progress made by contributing
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
programs, missions, and research.
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
entific understanding of our planet, other
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Target
N/A
N/A
1
1
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Achieved
N/A
N/A
Rating
N/A
N/A
Areas for FY 2022
1. Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
to Performance Goal 1.2.8.
Areas for FY 2023
1.
Significant progress demonstrated as determined by
annual external expert review of programs, missions,
and published, peer-reviewed research contributing
to Performance Goal 1.2.8.
Right: The eXposed Root On-Orbit Test System (XROOTS)
investigation team review Astro Garden plant growth testing in
a laboratory facility at Sierra Space in Madison, Wisconsin (left
to right: John Wetzel, Dan Wyman, Bob Morrow, Gil Tellez).
The XROOTS investigation, sponsored by NASA's Biological
and Physical Sciences Division, is designed to test critical
aspects of the Astro Garden system by using hydroponic and
aeroponic techniques to grow crop plants without soil, making
large scale plant production in space feasible. Image credit:
Sierra Space
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
54
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.9: Achieve critical milestones of Science Mission Directorate's heliophys-
ics, planetary science, and astrophysics major projects.
Number of critical milestones completed.
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
(APG)
(APG)
entific understanding of our planet, other
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
At least
At least
Target
10
12
10 of 12
6 of 8
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Achieved
8
15
Rating
Yellow
Green
3.
Complete the Europa Clipper System Integration
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Review (SIR).
Green
Green
Yellow
Green
Green
4.
Launch the Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART)
mission.
List of major projects critical milestones FY 2021
5. Complete the Psyche mission Pre-Ship Review (PSR).
1. Launch Sentinel-6A.
6.
Complete one Dragonfly mission instrument
2.
Complete the Landsat 9 Pre-Ship Review (PSR).
Preliminary Design Review (PDR).
3.
Initiate Surface Water and Ocean Topography
7. Complete the Mars Sample Return (MSR) program
(SWOT) mission Observatory Integration and Testing
Key Decision Point (KDP)-B review.
(I&T).
8.
Complete one Geospace Dynamics Constellation
4. Initiate the Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean
(GDC) mission instrument selections.
Ecosystem (PACE) mission spacecraft element
9.
Complete the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration
Integration and Testing (I&T).
Probe (IMAP) CDR.
5.
Land the Mars 2020 rover in the Jezero Crater, com-
10. Complete the Spectro-Photometer for the History
plete checkout, and begin surface operations.
of the Universe, Epoch of Reionization and Ices
6. Complete the Mars Sample Return mission Key
Explorer (SPHEREx) CDR.
Decision Point (KDP)-A review.
11. Complete the telescope for the Nancy Grace Roman
7. Complete the Double Asteroid Redirection Test
Space Telescope.
(DART) mission Pre-Ship Review (PSR).
12. Award two Commercial Lunar Payload Services
8.
Complete the Europa Clipper mission Critical Design
(CLPS) delivery task orders.
Review (CDR).
9. Complete the Psyche mission System Integration
List of major projects critical milestones FY 2023
Review (SIR).
1.
Complete the Volatiles Investigating Polar
10. Complete the Lucy mission Pre-Environmental
Exploration Rover (VIPER) Key Decision Point (KDP)-E
review.
Review (PER).
2.
11. Complete one Dragonfly Mobility radar and lidar
Initiate stacking and system-level tests of the inte-
performance characterization tests.
grated Europa Clipper spacecraft.
3.
12. Complete the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration
Complete the Dragonfly KDP-C review.
Probe (IMAP) Preliminary Design Review (PDR).
4.
Complete the Mars Sample Return (MSR) Sample
13. Complete the Spectro-Photometer for the History of
Retrieval Lander (SRL)-1 Preliminary Design Review
(PDR).
the Universe, Epoch of Reionization and Ices Explorer
(SPHEREx) Key Decision Point (KDP)-C review.
5.
Complete the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration
14. Complete the two Nancy Grace Roman Space
Probe (IMAP) mission System Integration Review
(SIR).
Telescope instrument Critical Design Reviews (CDRs).
6.
15. Complete the Volatiles Investigating Polar
Complete the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
instrument carrier.
Exploration Rover (VIPER) mission Key Decision Point
(KDP)-C review.
7.
Spectro-Photometer for the History of the Universe,
Epoch of Reionization and Ices Explorer (SPHEREx)
List of major projects critical milestones FY 2022
TBD
1. Launch the Lucy mission.
8. Award two Commercial Lunar Payload Services
2.
Complete the Volatiles Investigating Polar
(CLPS) delivery task orders.
Exploration Rover (VIPER) Critical Design Review
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.10 under the
(CDR).
2018 Strategic Plan.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
55
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
FY 2021 Performance Progress
to delays in finalization of the launch vehicle selec-
tion for the mission and the associated uncertain-
NASA achieved 8 of the 12 milestones planned for
ties in the design of launch vehicle-specific mission
FY 2021. Beginning in April 2020, NASA and its part-
elements.
ners limited hands-on work to prioritized projects,
following health guidance from the Centers for
The Lucy CDR was completed in October 2019
Disease Control and Prevention, to help protect
and the KDP-B review for IMAP was completed
the workforce from COVID-19 impacts. As a result
in January 2020. NASA awarded the second CLPS
of the change of operations, some projects did
mission task order in April. The Psyche CDR and
not achieve their milestones. NASA delayed the
Landsat-9 KDP-D review were completed in May,
SPHEREx KDP-C review to the first quarter of FY
and the KDP-D review for the DART mission and
2021 due to COVID-19 impacts and the loss of the
the Flight Acceptance Review, now referred to
originally selected telescope vendor. The SIRs for
as the Qualification and Acceptance Review, for
SWOT and NISAR also were delayed until FY 2021
Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich were in July. Mars 2020
due to COVID-19 impacts. In addition, the Europa
Perseverance launched on July 2020 on its way to
Clipper CDR was postponed to December 2020 due
the Red Planet. (Watch the launch on YouTube.)
Below: Family members of Dr. Michael Freilich, for whom the Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich satellite is named, gather at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California
on November 20, 2020, the day before the spacecraft's launch atop a Falcon 9 rocket. Freilich served as director of NASA's Earth Science Division in the
Science Mission Directorate at the Agency's Headquarters from 2006 until his retirement in 2019. A tireless advocate for advancing satellite measurements
of the ocean, he was instrumental in advancing ocean altimetry and helped drive the evolution of NASA Earth science from a program that launched an
Earth-observing space mission every few years to one that launches several missions each year. Freilich died August 5, 2020, of pancreatic cancer. Image
credit: NASA/Ben Smegelsky
un
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
56
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.10: Complete commissioning of the James Webb Space Telescope, the
most powerful and complex space telescope ever built, and begin Webb's
Cycle 2 observations. (Agency Priority Goal)
Number of critical milestones completed.
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
entific understanding of our planet, other
Year
(APG)
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Target
4
4
4
4
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Achieved
3
3
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
Rating
Yellow
Yellow
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Lagrange point between Earth and the Sun. The
Green
Yellow
Yellow
Green
Green
engineers completed the final comprehensive sys-
tem test in February 2021 and the deployment test
List of development milestones for FY 2021
for the mirror in March.
1.
Initiate observatory post-environment testing
deployments.
In April, the engineers began packing the five-layer
sunshield, which is roughly the size of a tennis
2. Complete final comprehensive system test.
court, to fit within the confines of the launch vehi-
3.
Complete sunshield folding in preparation for final
cle. The careful process of folding the silver mate-
stow for shipment.
rial took about a month. (Watch as engineers and
4.
Complete shipment of observatory to launch site.
technicians prepare Webb for its launch vehicle.)
List of critical milestones for FY 2022
Webb left by cargo ship from Seal Beach in
1. Launch James Webb Space Telescope.
California on September 24 and began its 16-day
2.
Perform all deployments of the observatory.
journey to the launch site in Kourou, French
3.
Initiate commissioning and operations for all science
Guiana. Webb was shipped in a custom-built, envi-
instruments.
ronmentally controlled container. It didn't arrive at
4.
Complete science instrument commissioning and
its destination until October 12 (in FY 2022).
begin normal operations.
List of critical milestones for FY 2023
1. Make early release science products available in
public archive.
2. Receive Cycle 2 proposals for second year of Webb
operations.
3. Conduct review of Cycle 2 proposals.
4.
Begin Cycle 2 observations.
This Performance Goal aligns to 1.1.11 under the
2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA fell short of achieving the last FY 2021 mile-
stone for this Performance Goal, resulting in a
Yellow rating.
Engineers for Webb initiated the post-environmen-
tal testing deployments for Webb in October 2020.
The deployments were to demonstrate that the
observatory would move and unfold as planned,
like a giant origami, after its journey to the second
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
57
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.2.1 [Completed at the end of FY 2021]: Advance scientific research with the
potential to understand the responses of physical and biological systems to
spaceflight.
Number of peer reviewed published studies.
This Performance Goal was achieved through
work by the Division of Biological and Physical
Sciences, part of NASA's Science Mission
Fiscal Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Directorate, and the Human Research
Target
500
360
PG Completed
Program (HRP), under the former Human
Space Exploration and Operations Mission
Achieved
360
455
Directorate.
Rating
Red
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Yellow
Red
Yellow
Green
Red
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA-supported researchers published 455
peer-reviewed studies on physical and biological
sciences, exceeding the FY 2021 target of 360. This
target was based on FY 2020 performance, which
was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The pace
of publication returned to pre-pandemic normal
during FY 2021.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
58
DISCOVER
Strategic Objective 1.3
Ensure NASA's science data are accessible to all and produce
practical benefits to society.
LEAD OFFICE
NASA's missions and research activities inspire
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
curiosity and increase the understanding of our
GOAL LEADER
planet, the solar system, and the universe. One
Karen Flynn, Deputy Associate Administrator for
of our core capabilities is the ability to collect,
Management, SMD
store, manage, analyze, and distribute data and
information for scientists, international partners,
Budget
learners of all ages, decision-makers, and industry
FY
$M
to further science, improve modeling, increase
knowledge, and spur economic innovation.
Op Plan
2021
$368.6
NASA generates, analyzes, activates, and archives
Requested
2022
$417.9
large amounts of data to support science objec-
Requested
2023
$444.3
tives and deliver data and scientific results to
users around the world. Over the next 5 years,
2024
$488.5
NASA will substantially increase the size of data
2025
$486.7
archives as the volume of data generated by
Outyear
new missions increases from approximately 10
2026
$505.9
petabytes per year today to over 100 petabytes
2027
$524.7
per year in 2026. This growth of NASA's science
archives presents unique opportunities for new
scientific discovery and partnerships, as well
as significant challenges for data management,
Below: Image shows a map of potential landslide risk output by NASA's Landslide Hazard Assessment Model (LHASA) in June 2021. These timely, targeted,
and customizable "nowcasts" are estimates of potential landslide activity in near-real time for each 1-square-kilometer area between the poles. Red indicates
the highest risk and dark blue indicates the lowest risk. Image Credit: NASA
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
curation, access, analysis, computing, and compu-
tational modeling.
As part of this effort, we plan to undertake invest-
ments and initiatives that will accelerate the
accessibility and use of NASA data by its existing
and new user communities. NASA's data initiatives
are focused on making actionable data accessible
to other Federal agencies, relevant decision-mak-
ers, stakeholders, and the public. This will be done
by investments in three key areas: 1) capabilities to
enable open-source science; 2) continuous evolu-
tion of data and computing systems; and 3) com-
munity and strategic partnerships for innovation.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
60
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.3.1: Accelerate the accessibility and use of NASA's science data and tools.
Number of critical milestones completed.
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
Year
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
Target
N/A
N/A
1
1
entific understanding of our planet, other
Achieved
N/A
N/A
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Rating
N/A
N/A
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
List of activities for FY 2022
1.
Develop and release a prototype interdisciplinary
science data search engine that allows users to dis-
cover 70 percent of NASA's scientific data.
List of activities for FY 2023
1. Deploy an operational interdisciplinary science data
search engine to allow users to discover 85 percent
of NASA's scientific data.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
61
DISCOVER
Strategic Goal 1
1.3.2: Apply insights from Earth science to benefit the economy, health,
quality of life, and environment around the globe.
Number of critical milestones completed.
NASA's Science Mission Directorate uses the
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
vantage point of space to achieve a deep sci-
Year
entific understanding of our planet, other
Target
N/A
N/A
2
2
planets and solar system bodies, the inter-
Achieved
N/A
N/A
planetary environment, the Sun and its effects
Rating
N/A
N/A
on the solar system, and the universe beyond.
List of activities for FY 2022
1. 40 percent of Earth science applications projects
advance one Applications Readiness Level (ARL) with
3 projects advancing to ARL 8 or 9, when an appli-
cation has been incorporated into regular use and
decision-making.
2.
Deliver an Earth science applications guidebook to
share knowledge in using Earth science information
to inform decisions and provide benefits to society.
List of activities for FY 2023
1.
40 percent of Earth science applications projects
advance one Applications Readiness Level (ARL) with
3 projects advancing to ARL 8 or 9, when an appli-
cation has been incorporated into regular use and
decision-making.
2. Engage 14,500 people across the Nation and around
the world to build skills in applying Earth science
information to benefit society.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
62
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
Extend Human Presence to the Moon and
on towards Mars for Sustainable Long-term
Exploration, Development, and Utilization.
NASA
NASA
eesa
The Orion spacecraft for NASA's Artemis I mission, fully assembled with its launch abort system, is lifted above the Space Launch System (SLS) rocket in
High Bay 3 of the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center in Florida on October 20, 2021. The stacking of Orion on top of the SLS completes
assembly for the Artemis I flight test. Teams will begin conducting a series of verification tests ahead of rolling out to Launch Complex 39B
for
the
Wet
Dress
Rehearsal.
Artemis I will be an uncrewed test flight of the Orion spacecraft and Space Launch System rocket as an integrated system ahead of crewed
flights
to
the Moon. Under Artemis, NASA aims to land the first woman and first person of color on the Moon and establish sustainable lunar exploration.
Image credit: NASA/Frank Michaux
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Objective 2.1
Explore the surface of the Moon and deep space.
LEAD OFFICE
ration and scientific utilization present unique
Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate
opportunities for major discoveries impacting
(ESDMD)
critical fields like medicine, energy, and manufac-
GOAL LEADER
turing that will benefit society worldwide.
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator
for Management, ESDMD
NASA will work closely with international partners
to achieve Artemis objectives and grow the global
Budget
space economy. These relationships will reinforce
America's position as the global leader in space
FY
$M
exploration and provide new avenues for partner-
Op Plan
2021
$5,017.4
ship with nations around the world. NASA's deep
space exploration efforts will continue to act as a
Requested
2022
$5,361.4
beacon of peace and scientific partnership around
Requested
2023
$6,153.0
the globe.
2024
$7,215.9
Artemis missions will be driven by scientific
2025
$7,669.2
objectives like collecting new information on
Outyear
planetary processes and the character and origin
2026
$7,897.5
of volatiles. NASA will uncover the history of our
2027
$8,092.3
Earth-Moon system and new information about
our Sun. The human data collected as mission
Artemis missions, and future human exploration
durations increase will make future work in deep
of Mars, will expand opportunities for Americans,
space safer and more efficient. What we learn will
increase our global standing, and inspire the next
also help us protect our home planet and improve
generation of leaders in STEM. Long-term explo-
daily life for people around the world.
Below: Artist's concept of the Artemis Base Camp, a science and technology outpost at the lunar South Pole. The base camp would include rovers, a fixed
habitat, fission surface power, and an in-situ resource utilization pilot plant to demonstrate the ability to harvest resources from the Moon. Image credit: NASA
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.1.1: Advance America's goal to land the first woman and first person of color
on the Moon by demonstrating capabilities that advance lunar exploration.
(Agency Priority Goal)
Number of milestones met.
NASA's Artemis activities are led by the
Exploration Systems Development Mission
Directorate (formerly led by the Human
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Exploration
and
Operations
Mission
Year
(APG)
(APG)
(APG)
Directorate).
Target
4
4
4
4
Achieved
3
4
Rating
Yellow
Green
cranes to lift the first booster segment into place.
The installation was complete on March 2, 2021.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
NASA successfully completed the final Green Run
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
Red
test of the SLS Core Stage on March 18, 2021. (Video
of the final test available on YouTube.) This series
List of milestones for FY 2021
of eight tests verified that the Core Stage is ready
1. Complete Artemis I booster segment installations on
for Artemis I. Each test was a check of the hardware
the Mobile Launcher.
and system that culminated with the hot fire of all
2. Complete the Space Launch System (SLS) Core Stage
Green Run hot fire testing.
four RS-25 engines on March 18.
3. Complete SLS Core Stage mate at the Kennedy Space
Following that milestone activity, NASA transferred
Center.
the SLS Core Stage from Stennis Space Center in
4. Award the Human Launch System (HLS) Option A.
Mississippi to the Vehicle Assembly Building at
Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Vehicle assembly
List of milestones for FY 2022
and integration proceeded as expected, despite
1. Complete the Artemis Il Crew Module/Service
Module mate.
COVID impacts to workforce personnel.
2. Complete the Artemis Il Interim Cryogenic
In support of lunar surface activities, NASA
Propulsion Stage.
awarded the Human Landing System Option A con-
3. Deliver the Artemis III Core Stage Forward Skirt.
tract in April 2021. We selected SpaceX to develop
4. Launch Artemis I.
the first commercial human lander to transport
astronauts to the lunar surface. Although a protest
List of milestones for FY 2023
was filed, the U.S. Court of Appeals upheld the
1. Complete Artemis II Booster Segment stacking.
award nearly six months later, in November 2021.
2.
Announce awards for sustaining lander develop-
ment.
NASA publicly announced in FY 2021 that despite
3. Deliver the Artemis II Core Stage to Kennedy Space
the progress being made in several areas, a crewed
Center.
Moon landing in 2024 was no longer possible due
4.
Hold for a Gateway initial capability milestone (i.e.,
to extensive delays in other areas, including the
HALO, PPE and iHAB)
first launch of the SLS rocket and Orion crew cap-
This Performance Goal aligns to 2.2.1 under the
sule. The next crewed Moon landing is now sched-
2018 Strategic Plan.
uled for no earlier than 2025.
*In January 2021, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
FY 2021 Performance Progress
discontinued public reporting Government-wide on Agency Pri-
ority Goals. NASA continued performance tracking and report-
The three programs that support the Artemis made
ing on the Artemis high-priority area as a Performance Goal with
some changes approved by OMB.
appreciable progress in FY 2021. NASA completed
the four annual milestones and successfully com-
pleted this Performance Goal.*
NASA stacked the SLS solid rocket boosters for
Artemis I onto the Mobile Launcher over several
weeks. On November 21, 2020, we used massive
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
65
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.1.2: Develop the capabilities and infrastructure necessary to transport
human missions from Earth to cislunar space.
Percent of milestones or activities completed, as identi-
fied on the Enterprise Cross-Program Integration Teams
Schedule.
NASA's Artemis activities are led by the
Exploration Systems Development Mission
Directorate (formerly led by the Human
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Exploration and Operations Mission
Directorate).
Target
N/A
N/A
5
5
Achieved
N/A
N/A
Rating
N/A
N/A
List of milestones for FY 2022
1. Mate the Artemis Il Crew Module (CM) Adapter to the
European Service Module (ESM).
2. Exploration Ground Systems break ground on the
Emergency Egress System at Pad-B.
3. Complete the Core Stage 2 Liquid Hydrogen tank.
4. Complete integration of Artemis Il Crew Module Part
1.
5. Complete the Artemis Il Core Stage liquid hydrogen
(LH2) tank and forward section mate.
List of milestones for FY 2023
1. Complete the Artemis Il Orion Launch Abort System
integration.
2.
Complete the Artemis Il Exploration Ground Systems
pad liquid hydrogen (LH2) storage tank standalone
verification and validation.
3.
Complete the Artemis III Crew Module Adapter
(CMA).
4.
Complete fabrication of the Artemis III Orion Stage
Adapter.
5.
Artemis IV Space Launch System Core Stage engines
available.
NASA
Right: In the early morning on October 20, 2020, the mobile launcher
for the Artemis I mission begins its rollout atop crawler-transporter 2
from the Vehicle Assembly Building at NASA's Kennedy Space Center
in Florida. The nearly 400-foot-tall mobile launcher was being rolled to
Launch Pad 39B. During its two-week stay at the pad, engineers with
Exploration Ground Systems and Jacobs performed several tasks,
including a timing test to validate the launch team's countdown time-
line, and a thorough, top-to-bottom wash down of the mobile launcher
to remove any debris remaining from construction and installation of
the umbilical arms. Photo credit: NASA/Ben Smegelsky
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
66
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.1.3: Complete the exploration activities that will support missions with
human crew members to the lunar surface.
Percent of milestones or activities completed, as identi-
fied on the Enterprise Cross-Program Integration Teams
Schedule.
NASA's Artemis activities are led by the
Exploration Systems Development Mission
Directorate (formerly led by the Human
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Exploration and Operations Mission
Directorate).
Target
N/A
N/A
5
5
Achieved
N/A
N/A
Rating
N/A
N/A
List of milestones for FY 2022
1.
Complete the Exploration Extravehicular Activity
(xEVA) development validation testing unit.
2. Execute the Human Landing System (HLS) Option A
contract after the stay of performance.
3.
Award xEVA contract(s).
4.
Issue sustaining lander development Request for
Proposals.
5.
Establish Key Decision Point (KDP)-1 and the Agency
baseline commitment for lifecycle cost, schedule,
and technical parameters for Gateway.
List of milestones for FY 2023
1.
Complete the HLS Option A (SpaceX) propulsion
transfer flight test.
2.
Complete the primary structure build for the
Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO).
3.
Conduct xEVA contractor design review.
4. Award Next Space Technologies for Exploration
Partnerships (NextSTEP)-2 Appendix P: Sustaining
Lunar Development contract.
5. Award the Lunar Terrain Vehicle (LTV) phase 1 con-
tract(s).
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
67
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Objective 2.2
Develop a human spaceflight economy enabled by a
commercial market.
LEAD OFFICE
NASA will maintain access to a human-rated
Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD)
platform in low Earth orbit (LEO) to continue
GOAL LEADER
U.S. human presence and expand the American
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator
foothold in space. The continuous operation of a
for Management, SOMD
research and technology demonstration platform
in space is critical to achieving NASA's and the
Budget
Nation's goals in science, technology, and human
FY
$M
space flight. As such, we are investing resources
to foster a robust human spaceflight economy.
Op Plan
2021
$4,599.3
Since its inception, industry, academia, and our
Requested
2022
$4,589.2
international partners have used the International
Requested
2023
$4,616.6
Space Station (ISS) as a testbed for research and
the development and maturation of state-of-the-
2024
$3,731.9
art systems that increase access to space. NASA
2025 $3,496.7
is supporting new space stations from which
Outyear
we and other customers can purchase services
2026
$3,545.8
and stimulate the growth of commercial human
2027
$3,671.7
spaceflight activities. As commercial LEO destina-
tions become available, we intend to implement
Below:
Four Expedition 64 flight engineers, who also are the NASA's SpaceX Crew-1 astronauts, gather around a laptop computer to join a video conference
on February 7, 2021. Image Credit: NASA
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
an orderly transition from current ISS operations to
these new commercial destinations.
The ISS is the prime example of American leader-
ship in global space exploration, enabling a U.S.-led
multinational partnership to advance shared goals
in space. The ISS supports a robust commercial
marketplace, with more than 20 commercial facil-
ities operating and generating revenue, including
BUE
in-space manufacturing facilities and a commer-
cial airlock. As NASA increases the opportunities
for business on the ISS, the number and types of
companies taking advantage of those opportunities
will likely increase, which will in turn create more
demand.
Right: On July 29, 2021, Boeing's CST-100
Starliner spacecraft and the United Launch Alliance
Atlas V rocket begins rollout from the Vertical
Integration Facility to the launch pad at Space
Launch Complex-41 on Cape Canaveral Space
Force Station in Florida. Starliner will launch on
the Atlas V for Boeing's second uncrewed Orbital
Flight Test (OFT-2) for NASA's Commercial Crew
Program. OFT-2 is an important uncrewed mis-
sion designed to test the end-to-end capabilities
of the new system for NASA's Commercial Crew
Program. Photo credit: NASA/Kim Shiflett
et
Left: NASA completed the signing of the Human
Rating Certification Plan on November 10, 2020, for
SpaceX's crew transportation system after a thor-
ough Flight Readiness Review ahead the Agency's
SpaceX Crew-1 mission with astronauts to the ISS.
On November 8, the astronauts for the Crew-1 mis-
sion posed for a photo in front of the Crew Dragon
spacecraft, named Resilience by the crew, inside the
SpaceX hangar at NASA Kennedy Space Center's
Launch Complex 39A. From left, JAXA astronaut
Soichi Noguchi, mission specialist; NASA astronaut
Michael Hopkins, spacecraft commander; NASA
astronaut Shannon Walker, mission specialist; and
NASA astronaut Victor Glover, pilot. Image credit:
SpaceX
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
69
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.2.1: Expand commercial activities in low Earth orbit (LEO) and stimulate the
human spaceflight economy, with a focus on deploying commercial LEO desti-
nations that can be used by NASA and other customers.
Number of milestones met.
The work for this Performance Goal was accom-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
plished by the ISS, LEO Commercialization, and
Year
(APG)
Commercial Crew Programs under the former
Target
4
3
3
4
Human Exploration and Operations Mission
Directorate.
Achieved
2
3
Rating
Red
Green
efforts, we completed the three FY 2021 milestones
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
and successfully achieving this Agency Priority
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
Goal.
List of development milestones for FY 2022
In February 2021, NASA updated its pricing policy
for commercial activities conducted on the ISS to
1.
Complete required partnership agreements with
reflect full reimbursement for the value of NASA
other government agencies for commercial activities.
2.
Initialize the free-flyer project milestones.
resources. In April 2021, NASA clarified updates to
the pricing policy associated with services for pri-
3. Successfully complete the second provider commer-
cial test flight launch.
vate astronaut mission providers.
List of development milestones for FY 2023
A private astronaut mission is defined as a com-
mercial mission consisting of activities conducted
1. Award Commercial LEO Development-funded Space
Act Agreements.
by private astronauts aboard the ISS or in a com-
mercial element attached to the ISS, transported on
2.
Release draft of Commercial LEO Development Crew
and Service Requirements document.
a U.S. commercial spacecraft dedicated to this pri-
3.
vate mission. In May 2021, NASA and Axiom Space
Execute a private astronaut mission to the
International Space Station.
signed an order for the first private astronaut
4.
Announce a new commercial space capabilities
mission to the ISS, scheduled to take place in 2022.
competition.
NASA finalized the acquisition strategy to enable
This Performance Goal aligns to 2.1.2 (Agency
partnerships for the development and space flight
Priority Goal) under the 2018 Strategic Plan.
demonstrations of Commercial Destination Free
Flyers (CDFF), commercially owned and operated
2.1.2: Enable a robust commercial low Earth
destinations in low Earth orbit. CDFF will utilize mul-
orbit economy in which transportation, habi-
tiple funded Space Act Agreements and is expected
tation, and on-orbit services are available for
to last approximately four years, culminating in at
purchase by NASA and other customers.
least a preliminary design level of maturity. NASA
released a final Announcement for Proposals for
List of development milestones for FY 2020
Phase 1 in July 2021, and proposals were received in
1. Make awards for the port solicitation - NextStep 2
August.
Broad Agency Announcement (Appendix I).
2.
Make awards for the free-flyer solicitation - NextStep
*In January 2021, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
2 Broad Agency Announcement (Appendix K).
discontinued public reporting Government-wide on Agency Pri-
ority Goals. NASA continued performance tracking and reporting
3.
Initiate astronaut training for initial private astronaut
on the Webb high-priority area as a Performance Goal with some
mission under a reimbursable space act agreement.
changes approved by OMB.
4.
Both commercial crew industry partners complete
demonstration missions.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA has made the ISS available to private entities
to enable commercial and marketing opportunities
in low Earth orbit. As a result of these continued
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
70
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.2.2: Provide support for and utilization of commercial facilities onboard the
International Space Station (ISS) for NASA, other Government agencies, and
academic and industry users, including the ISS National Laboratory to expand
the space economy.
Number of commercial facilities launched and operating.
The International Space Station Program,
part of NASA's Space Operations Mission
Fiscal
2020
2021
2023
2024
Directorate (formerly part of the Human
2022
2025
Year
Exploration and Operations Mission
Target
20
20
Directorate), plans, develops, and manages
the capabilities that support Artemis human
Achieved
lunar exploration missions and the expanding
Rating
commercial use of the ISS.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
71
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.2.3: Provide operational resources to enable the closure of capability gaps
in support of deep space exploration.
Number of research and technology demonstrations
The International Space Station (ISS)
conducted.
Program, part of NASA's Human Exploration
and Operations Mission Directorate, plans,
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
develops, and manages the capabilities that
Year
support the expanding commercial use of the
Target
5
5
5
6
ISS.
Achieved
5
5
Rating
Green
Green
Airborne Particulate Monitoring (APM) demon-
strated an instrument for measuring and
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
quantifying the concentration of both small
Green
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
and large particles in spacecraft air. The data
can be used to create a map of air quality
in terms of particles and shed light on the
This Performance Goal aligns to 2.1.1 under the
sources of such particles.
2018 Strategic Plan.
Collapsible Continency Urinal (CCU) tested the
2.1.1: Initiate technology demonstrations on the
fluid dynamics and stability of liquid of the sys-
tem, which is scheduled to be used in Orion.
International Space Station to advance deep
space exploration.
Brine Processor Assembly (BPA) demonstrated
increased efficiency for recycling water from
FY 2021 Performance Progress
crew urine.
The International Space Station is an unprece-
The 4 Bed CO2 Scrubber (4BedCO2) demon-
dented achievement in global human endeavors to
strates engineering and efficiency changes to
conceive, plan, build, operate, and utilize a research
improve durability and maintainability
platform in space. The ISS Program is utilizing the
station as a testbed to demonstrate operational
techniques and capabilities and demonstrate tech-
nologies and advanced systems that benefit space
science capabilities and human and robotic explo-
ration beyond LEO.
NASA met the FY 2021 target by demonstrating
seven technologies aboard the ISS:
RFID-Enabled Autonomous Logistics
Management 2 (REALM-2) tested the use of a
radio frequency identification (RFID) reader
and antennas attached to a robotic free-flyer
named Astrobee to identify RFID-tagged cargo
on the ISS to determine its presence and
location in order to help the crew find items
quickly and efficiently.
Spacesuit Evaporation Rejection Flight
Experiment (SERFE) demonstrated a new tech-
nology to remove heat from spacesuits and
maintain appropriate temperatures for crew
members and equipment during space walks.
Spacecraft Fire Safety V (Saffire V) studied how
fires spread in space.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
72
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.2.4: Provide transportation through commercial partners to support the
International Space Station (ISS) and low Earth orbit.
Number of Commercial Crew missions launched.
The Crew and Cargo Program, part of NASA's
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Space Operations Mission Directorate, pro-
Year
vides for crew rotation and cargo resupply
Target
2
2
2
missions to the ISS. The Commercial Crew
Achieved
1
2
Program continues NASA's collaboration with
the U.S. commercial space industry to develop
Rating
Yellow
Green
safe and reliable crew transportation.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
Yellow
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.2.2 under the
2018 Strategic Plan.
2.2.5 [Completed at the end of FY 2022]: Provide
NASA crew transportation through commercial
partners to low Earth orbit.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA successfully executed the goal of two crewed
missions in FY 2021. NASA's SpaceX Crew 1 mission
launched to the ISS on November 15, 2020. Crew 2
launched on April 23, 2021.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
73
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.2.4 [Completed at the end of FY 2021]: Provide cargo transportation
through commercial partners to support the International Space Station
(ISS).
Number of Commercial Cargo missions launched/deliv-
Commercial cargo missions transitioned
ered to ISS.
from International Space Station to the Crew
and Cargo Program, part of NASA's Space
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Operations Mission Directorate. The Crew
Year
and Cargo Program provides for crew rotation
Target
4
4
4
4
and cargo resupply missions to the ISS.
Achieved
4
6
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Yellow
Green
Green
Green
List of development milestones for FY 2023
1. Award Commercial LEO Development-funded Space
Act Agreements.
2.
Release draft of Commercial LEO Development Crew
and Service Requirements document.
3.
Execute a private astronaut mission to the
International Space Station.
4. Announce a new commercial space capabilities
competition.
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.2.1 under the
2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this
Performance Goal by executing four Commercial
Resupply Services (CRS) missions to support the
ISS: Northrup Grumman (NG)-14 in October 2020;
SpaceX (SpX)-21 in December 2020; NG-15 in
February 2021; SpX-22 in June 2021; NG-16 in August
2021; and SpX-23 in Sept 2021.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
74
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Objective 2.3
Develop capabilities and perform research to safeguard
explorers.
LEAD OFFICE
Humans worked briefly on the Moon 50 years ago
Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD)
and have pioneered technological advances in
GOAL LEADER
low Earth orbit for the past 40 years. The activi-
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator
ties that NASA leads that will return humans to
for Management, SOMD
the Moon, and from there on towards Mars, are
focused on "buying down" risk through research
Budget
and the development of tools and techniques to
FY
$M
protect humans during deep space exploration.
NASA is working to overcome radiation, crew
Op Plan
2021
$212.8
isolation, and deep space communications delays,
Requested
2022
$232.0
as well as food, medicines, and shelf-life con-
straints. Each of these challenges must be solved
Requested
2023
$252.7
to ensure crew members are safe and healthy as
2024
$254.8
we move beyond low Earth orbit.
2025
$256.2
NASA is pursuing new technologies that will help
Outyear
manage the effects of extended stays in space on
2026
$251.3
human health and performance. Each advance in
2027
$251.4
our knowledge can provide basic human needs,
including oxygen and water, along with the ability
to maintain and repair critical systems. NASA will
demonstrate the performance of emergent tech-
Below: NASA astronaut Mark Vande Hei works on Celestial Immunity, an investigation of how gravity affects immune response, potentially supporting
development of new vaccines and drugs to prevent and treat existing and emerging human diseases. Celestial Immunity evaluates the effects of gravity on
functional immune response and the role of age in regulating immune pathways, using cells from elderly and younger adult donors. It builds on earlier space
station studies that evaluated the function of white blood cells, extending the observation period from hours to days and expanding the analysis to an array of
activated immune pathways. Gravity, convection, and buoyancy interfere with cell behavior in laboratory-based studies on Earth, but microgravity eliminates
these
factors. Results could support development of new vaccines and drugs to prevent and treat existing and emerging human diseases. During the week,
crew members processed samples for the investigation. Image Credit: NASA
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
nologies in an environment where the risk to the
safety of human or vehicle operations can validate
the performance of the technology without risking
the crew or mission, and prior to their use in an
operational environment.
NASA emphasizes partnering with industry and
academia to develop new technologies that will
enable future space travel that is less reliant on
resupply and communications from Earth. The
resultant reduction in logistics costs and increase
in system capabilities and reliability are designed
to safeguard humans on missions beyond low
Earth orbit. The knowledge gained though research
on the effects of reduced gravity on the systems
in the body-including studying research areas
that are unique to the Moon, Mars, and other
destinations-will help quantify the best methods
Below: Megan McArthur removes Kidney Cells-02 hardware inside the
and technologies to support safe and productive
Space Automated Bioproduct Laboratory and swaps media inside the
human missions in deep space.
MSG. The experiment uses a 3D kidney cell model known as a tissue chip
to study the effects of microgravity on formation of microcrystals in kidney
tubules. Results could support design of better treatments for conditions
such as kidney stones and bone loss for astronauts and osteoporosis for
people on Earth. Photo credit: NASA
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
76
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.3.1: Identify activities that will mitigate the highest risks to crew health and
performance.
Funded investigations and/or published papers.
Human Space Flight Operations, Human
Research Program, and Exploration
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Capabilities are part of the Space Operations
Year
Mission Directorate
6 new funded
investigations
and 160
Target
peer-reviewed
published
papers
Achieved
Rating
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
77
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
Strategic Objective 2.4
Enable space access and services.
LEAD OFFICE
NASA provides safe, reliable, and cost-effective
Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD)
launch services for NASA and NASA-sponsored
GOAL LEADER
payloads seeking access to space on U.S. com-
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator
mercial launch vehicles. As the launch agent of
for Management, SOMD
the U.S civil space sector, NASA relies on the
Launch Services Program (LSP) to certify new
Budget
commercial launch vehicles for readiness to fly
FY
$M
high-value spacecraft, and direct vital launch
mission assurance efforts to ensure the great-
Op Plan
2021
$668.9
est probability of launch mission success. LSP's
Requested
2022
$715.2
primary responsibility is to meet the needs of
a diverse customer base spanning our Mission
Requested
2023
$722.2
Directorates, a wide range of educational organi-
2024
$776.8
zations, and other customers. LSP is the Agency's
recognized expert in all aspects of commercial
2025
$796.8
launch services, including acquisition, certification,
Outyear
2026
$768.8
and mission management.
2027
$697.2
NASA provides the critical communications and
navigation services to our operational missions,
and we will continue to invest in critical technol-
ogies that will increase reliable communications
capabilities. NASA engages with the satellite com-
Below: In March 2021, NASA tested the largest rocket element it has ever built, the core stage of the Space Launch System (SLS). Four RS-25 engines fired
for 8 minutes and 19 seconds on the test stand at Stennis Space Center in Mlssissippi. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
munications industry to develop communications
capabilities that supports U.S. needs, are globally
competitive, and advance U.S. leadership in the
generation of new markets. Today, commercially
provided satellite communications continue to
mature, and NASA envisions a commercial commu-
nications market where near-Earth customers will
have access to suitable commercial services and
where NASA is one of many customers.
Developing and testing rocket propulsion systems
is foundational to spaceflight. Whether the payload
is a robotic science experiment or a crewed mis-
sion, the propulsion system used to launch it must
be safe and reliable. Utilizing unique test facilities,
NASA ensures the safe and effective execution of a
rigorous engine test program, critical to any rocket
propulsion development activity.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
79
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.4.1: Complete Launch Services Program (LSP) commercial non-crewed
launch services objectives for NASA-Managed science, exploration, U.S.
Government, and Government-sponsored missions.
Percentage of expendable launch objectives successfully
completed.
NASA's Launch Services Program, part of
the Space Operations Mission Directorate
(formerly part of Human Exploration and
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Operations Mission Directorate) is respon-
Year
sible for acquiring and launching expendable
Target
100%
100%
100%
100%
launch vehicles.
Achieved
100%
100%
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.2.4 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA provided launch services, test services, and
communications support to internal and external
customers throughout FY 2021.
NASA is successfully managing launch service
capabilities across the civil space sector and man-
aged two launches from Vandenberg Space Force
Base in California, in FY 2021. The Sentinel-6
Michael Freilich launched November 21, 2020, and
Landsat-9 launch on September 27, 2021, with
both launch campaigns conducted during diffi-
cult personnel and supply chain challenges due
to COVID-19. NASA also managed multiple com-
mercial launch services contract awards, including
the Gateway Program's Habitation and Logistics
Outpost (HALO) + Power and Propulsion Element
(PPE) and the Science Mission Directorate's Europa
Clipper missions, and conducted additional launch
service acquisitions for NASA and other civil sector
customers.
LIQUID OXYGEN 40.000 GALICAPACITY
NO SMOKING NO OPEN FLAMES
150 PSIG NOF
Above: The United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket with the Landsat 9
satellite onboard launches on September 27, 2021, from Space Launch
Complex 3 at Vandenberg Space Force Base in California. Photo Credit:
NASA/Bill Ingalls
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
80
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.4.2: Maintain the proficiency of Space Communications network services.
Percentage of network proficiency.
Space Communications and Navigation, part
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
of the Space Operations Mission Directorate
Year
(formerly part of Human Exploration and
Target
96%
96%
95%
95%
Operations Mission Directorate), manages
NASA's ground-based communications facil-
Achieved
96%
99.4%
ities and services and the Tracking and Data
Rating
Green
Green
Relay Satellites.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.2.5 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
4.2.5: Maintain the delivery of Space
Communications network services.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA's communications networks-the Deep Space
Network (DSN) and the Near Space Network (NSN),
which has Relay and Direct-to-Earth (DTE) com-
ponents-achieved 99.4 percent service delivery,
exceeding the FY 2021 target of a minimum 95 per-
cent network proficiency. The final FY 2021 average
delivery was:
NSN relay - 99.9 percent
NSN Direct-to-Earth (DTE) - 99.8 percent (visit
Near Space Network DTE Now to see real-time
activity between spacecraft and antennas
around the world)
DSN - 98.5 percent (visit Deep Space Network
Now to see real-time activity between deep-
space spacecraft and antennas around the
world)
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
81
EXPLORE
Strategic Goal 2
2.4.2: Ensure a core capability (personnel and assets) of propulsion test
assets are maintained and are available to meet Agency propulsion test
requirements and support Agency mission needs, as well as other customers'
test requests.
Percentage availability.
NASA's Rocket Propulsion Test program, part
of the Human Exploration and Operations
Mission Directorate, manages rocket propul-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
sion test facilities, activities, and resources.
Year
Target
90%
90%
90%
90%
90%
90%
Achieved
99.7%
99.7
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.2.3 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
4.2.3: Maximize the availability of propulsion test
facilities that support NASA's planned test require-
ments
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA exceeded the FY 2021 target of 90 percent
availability for this performance goal with 511 tests
conducted with only one facility delayed, result-
ing in 99 .8 percent availability for the fiscal year.
Significant accomplishments included the suc-
cessful hot fire of the Space Launch System (SLS)
core stage on the B-2 test stand at Stennis Space
Center in Mississippi, a critical milestone ahead
of the Agency's Artemis I mission, and the com-
pletion of all seven of the Retrofit-2 RS-25 series
tests providing data to enhance production of new
RS-25 engines and several engine components
that are being manufactured with cutting-edge and
cost-saving technologies. RPT facilities continued
to evaluate and implement high-risk/high-priority
facility maintenance and modernization projects
to assure propulsion test assets are available to
support current and future propulsion test require-
ments.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
82
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
Catalyze economic growth and drive
innovation to address national challenges.
N542AJ
N5427
Joby's all-electric vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) aircraft is pictured at the company's Electric Flight Base, located near Big Sur, California.
NASA
began
flight testing with the aircraft as part of the Agency's Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) National Campaign. This test runs through September 10, 2021. Image
Credit: Joby Aviation
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Objective 3.1
Innovate and advance transformational space technologies.
LEAD OFFICE
Technological leadership remains vital to our
Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD)
national security, economic prosperity, and
GOAL LEADER
global competitiveness. The Nation's continued
Mike Green, Deputy Associate Administrator for
economic leadership is due in part to the techno-
Management, STMD
logical investments made over time that enabled
our country to emerge as a global technological
Budget
leader. That commitment accelerated the econ-
omy with the creation of new industries, products,
FY
$M
and services that yielded lasting benefits. Moving
Op Plan
2021
$1,100.0
forward, a technology-driven NASA will continue
Requested
$1,425.0
to help fuel our Nation's economic engine and
2022
support the creation of jobs for decades to come,
Requested
2023
$1,437.9
while also providing valuable breakthroughs
for NASA's missions and the commercial space
2024
$1,466.7
industry. In short, technology drives the space
2025
$1,496.0
economy.
Outyear
2026 $1,525.9
As NASA embarks on its next era of discovery and
2027
$1,556.4
exploration, the advancement of transformational
space technologies guides the journey ahead.
We invest in crosscutting and transformational
technologies that have high potential for offset-
Below: In April 2021, NASA and Maxar Technologies successfully completed the On-orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing
1
(OSAM-1)
mission
spacecraft accommodation Critical Design Review (CDR). This milestone demonstrates that the maturity of the design for the OSAM-1 spacecraft bus is
appropriate to support proceeding with fabrication, assembly, integration, and testing. Image credit: Maxar Technologies
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
ting mission risk, reducing cost, and advancing
existing or creating new capabilities. In the coming
years, NASA will advance technologies that enable
rapid, safe, and efficient transportation as well as
expanded access to diverse surface destinations.
We seek to enable a vibrant space economy with
supporting utilities and commodities through
investments in in-situ resource utilization, sus-
tainable power systems, and autonomous con-
struction. These technological advancements will
foster U.S. innovation and competitiveness, drive
economic growth and the creation of good-pay-
ing jobs, and ensure national leadership in space.
In addition, NASA recognizes the United States'
ability to utilize space safely and sustainably is
paramount. NASA will continue to advance early
research and development technology solutions
in orbital debris mitigation, tracking, and remedia-
tion.science observations; and harnessing data for
climate research. We will formulate new prizes, tar-
geted topics within the Small Business Innovation
Research and Small Business Technology Transfer
programs, and grant opportunities to address cli-
mate challenges and the clean energy economy. In
addition, NASA will be supporting Earth-observing
capabilities for Small Spacecraft platforms to sup-
port breakthrough science and National efforts to
address climate change.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
85
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.1: Foster a diverse U.S engineering and technology talent base, expand
commercial opportunities in the space industry, and advance innovative
technology solutions.
NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
Critical activities completed for Early Stage Innovation
nurtures innovative and high-risk/high-pay-
and Partnerships (ESIP) program supporting the Perfor-
off technologies and concepts, including early
mance Goal.
stage ideas, that could transform future NASA
missions, as well as the aerospace industry.
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
N/A
N/A
At least 4
Target
completed
Achieved
N/A
N/A
Rating
N/A
N/A
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
List of development milestones for FY 2022
1. Achieve at least 1 knowledge transition for a mini-
mum of 75 percent of research grants.
2.
Offer 45 new opportunities to broaden NASA's inno-
vation community through prizes, challenges, and
crowdsourcing.
3.
Achieve 60 innovative Small Business Technologies
that receive external funding to further advance
technologies.
4.
Achieve 3,600 licenses and software usage agree-
ments.
5. Complete benchmarking of diversity, equity, and
inclusion data for ESIP portfolio.
List of development milestones for FY 2023
1.
Achieve at least 1 knowledge transition for a mini-
mum of 75 percent of research grants.
2.
Offer 45 new opportunities to broaden NASA's inno-
vation community through prizes, challenges, and
crowdsourcing.
3.
Achieve 60 innovative Small Business Technologies
that receive external funding to further advance
technologies.
4.
Achieve 3,600 licenses and software usage agree-
ments.
5.
Conduct 10 strategic engagement opportunities to
underserved and underrepresented communities.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
86
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.1 [Completed at the end of FY 2021]: Encourage creative and innovative
solutions to space technology challenges by investing in early stage tech-
nologies and concepts from U.S.
innovators.
NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
nurtures innovative and high-risk/high-pay-
Number of new early stage technologies and concepts
off technologies and concepts, including early
invested in.
stage ideas, that could transform future NASA
missions, as well as the aerospace industry.
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Target
210
210
fusion energy. Helion Energy is currently building
Achieved
253
242
a cost-effective, zero-carbon electrical power plant
Rating
Green
Green
in Everett, Washington, to test the latest version of
its non-ignition fusion technology that Helion says
will provide "flexible, scalable, baseload power that
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
is affordable, providing the world a new path to full
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
decarbonization of electricity generation."
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA also encouraged creativity and innovation
within NASA Centers and its brightest early career
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multi-
technologists by supporting emerging technolo-
year Performance Goal as the Agency continued to
gies and creative initiatives, selecting 128 Center
advance early stage innovation. In FY 2021, NASA
Innovation Fund (CIF) projects and making five Early
invested in 242 new early stage technologies and
Career Initiative awards.
concepts, exceeding the target of 210. These invest-
ments ensure a healthy base of promising early
stage solutions for further development by other
programs and organizations.
NASA leveraged the country's spectrum of aca-
demic researchers to accelerate the development
of low technology readiness level (TRL) space
technologies to support future space science
and exploration needs of NASA, other govern-
ment agencies, and the commercial space sector.
This included selecting 14 Early Stage Innovation
awards, six Lunar Surface Technology Research
Opportunities, two Space Technology Research
Institutes, 58 Space Technology Graduate Research
Opportunities, and six Early Career Faculty awards
through NASA's Space Technology Research Grants
(STRG) program.
In addition, the Agency continued to engage
America's innovators and entrepreneurs to nurture
visionary concepts that could lead to future aero-
space breakthroughs. NASA Innovative Advanced
Concepts (NIAC) awarded 23 new concept studies
in FY 2021. NASA's early stage investments con-
tinue to offer promising ways to bolster technology
development, economic growth, and expansion of
the aerospace industry. For example, NIAC Fellow
David Kirtley's work on nuclear propulsion has not
only transitioned to the Department of Energy, but
has also impacted commercial development of
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
87
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.2: Mature technology projects that offer significant improvement to exist-
ing solutions or enable new capabilities.
Percentage of key performance parameters completed
for Technology Maturation projects.
NASA's Game Changing Development pro-
gram, part of the Space Technology Mission
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Directorate, guides innovative, high-impact
Year
technologies and capabilities from proof of
Target
60%
60%
60%
60%
concept through component or breadboard
Achieved
64%
59%
testing in a relevant environment.
Rating
Green
Yellow
MEDLI2 was one of the crucial technologies on the
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
rover's protective aeroshell that helped document
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
Green
the entry, descent, and landing of the spacecraft.
Its role in collecting critical data about the harsh
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.1.2 under
environment during Perseverance's entry through
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
the planet's atmosphere gave NASA a bird's eye
view of what was happening to the aeroshell as it
FY 2021 Performance Progress
flew through the Martian skies. The data provided
NASA missed achieving this performance goal
was essential to understanding how much margin
target (i.e., 60 percent of planned key performance
remained on the Perseverance entry, along with
parameter (KPP) events) by a single percentage
data that will be used to improve prediction models
point. The KPPs' thresholds that NASA met or
and tools for future missions.
exceeded during FY 2021 each represent technol-
MEDA has continued to operate successfully, pro-
ogy advancement that may lead to entirely new
viding daily and seasonal reports on atmospheric
mission approaches and provide solutions to
pressure, humidity, ultraviolet radiation at the
national needs. COVID-19 effects, along with proj-
Martian surface, air temperature, and ground tem-
ect-specific technology development challenges,
perature around the rover. The data will support
impacted NASA's ability to meet the desired perfor-
predictions for future science and exploration mis-
mance thresholds for some KPPs.
sions: dust lifting and transport; how storms evolve
NASA met KPPs in projects such as Autonomous
into large ones encircling Mars; how dust particles
Pop-Up Flat Folding Explorer Robot (A-PUFFER),
interact with light; and temperature, heat, and dust
Automated Reconfigurable Mission Adaptive
cycles.
Digital Assembly Systems (ARMADAS), and Rapid
Analysis and Manufacturing Propulsion Technology
(RAMPT). A-PUFFER demonstrated multiple small
rovers that cooperated to explore an unmapped
environment without a human in-the-loop. We suc-
cessfully transitioned A-PUFFER to the Cooperative
Autonomous Distributed Robotic Exploration
(CADRE) lunar technology demonstration project,
which will deliver a system of multi-agent autono-
mous robotic rovers for launch by a Commercial
Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) provider in 2024.
Additionally, Mars Entry, Descent, and Landing
Instrumentation (MEDLI) 2 and the Mars
Environmental Dynamics Analyzer (MEDA), which
launched on the 2020 Mars Perseverance rover,
operated successfully in their respective demon-
strations.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
88
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.3: Rapidly develop and demonstrate technologies for exploration,
discovery, and the expansion of space commerce through partnership with
U.S. industry and academia.
Small Spacecraft Technology develops and
Number of technologies tested suborbitally or orbitally.
demonstrates new small spacecraft technol-
ogies for NASA's missions in science, explo-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
ration, and space operations. Technology
Year
Demonstration Missions bridge the gap
Target
N/A
N/A
40
40
between laboratory-proven and final infusion
by providing ground and flight test for prom-
Achieved
N/A
N/A
ising technologies. Both programs are part of
Rating
N/A
N/A
the Space Technology Mission Directorate.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
89
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.3 [Completed at the end of FY 2021]: Demonstrate new technology and
capabilities to support NASA's missions and space industry growth.
Critical activities completed for two programs supporting
the performance goal.
Small Spacecraft Technology develops and
demonstrates new small spacecraft technol-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
ogies for NASA's missions in science, explo-
Year
ration, and space operations. Technology
6 milestones for each of
Demonstration Missions bridge the gap
Target
2 contributing programs
between laboratory-proven and final infusion
13
15
by providing ground and flight test for prom-
milestones
milestones
ising technologies. Both programs are part of
for Small
for Small
the Space Technology Mission Directorate.
Spacecraft;
Spacecraft;
7
5
milestones
milestones
for Tech
for Tech
Demo
Demo
innovative navigation technologies and verifying
Rating
Green
Yellow
the dynamics of a unique orbit for human explo-
ration missions. We also met milestones for Dual
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Propulsion Experiment (DUPLEX);; Tiled lonic
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
Liquid Electrospray (TILE) e ingine;, Pathfinder
Technology)-1 Hydros; Terabyte Infrared Delivery;
Planned Critical milestones for FY 2021
Courier Solar Electric Propulsion Module; ; Intrepid
1.
Achieve a key milestone in 6 Small Spacecraft
particle detector; CubeSat Laser Infrared CrosslinK
Technology projects.
(CLICK) B/C, Tipping Point with Blue Canyon
2. Achieve 6 key milestones for the Technology
Technologies; and the Lunar Flashlight Propulsion
Demonstration program.
System.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
The Technology Demonstration Missions Low-
Earth Orbit Flight Test of an Inflatable Decelerator
During FY 2021, NASA had several impactful
(LOFTID) passed its KDP-D in preparation for
successes in its technology demonstration port-
delivery in 2022. Additionally, the OSAM-2 mission
folio, but the Agency fell short of achieving this
completed its post-PDR and associated KDP, and
Performance Goal. We completed key milestones
our Cryogenic Fluid Management activities were
in 15 Small Spacecraft Technology projects, exceed-
consolidated into a portfolio project for the ben-
ing the targeted six. We also achieved five key
efit of strategic decision making, accounting, and
milestones and key decision points (KDP), fall-
streamlining the execution of work.
ing just short of the target of six, in Technology
Demonstration Missions, major reviews that
NASA also conducted technology demonstrations
serve as gateways to the next lifecycle phase. A
on the surface of Mars, such as Mars Oxygen
crowded launch manifest led to a delay in the
In-Situ Resource Utilization Experiment (MOXIE)
launch window for the Laser Communications
and Terrain Relative Navigation (TRN). MOXIE
Relay Demonstration (LCRD) project, pushing it out
successfully converted the thin, carbon dioxide-rich
into early FY 2022. Several other missions in devel-
Martian atmosphere into oxygen, paving the way
opment, including On-Orbit Servicing, Assembly
for isolating and storing oxygen on Mars to help
and Manufacturing (OSAM)-1 and OSAM-2, were
power rockets that could lift astronauts off the
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and technical
planet's surface and provide breathable air for
challenges.
astronauts. The TRN system successfully used a
camera on the bottom of the rover to compare
NASA's FY 2021 achievements in Small Spacecraft
the features on the Martian surface to an onboard
Technology included four milestones towards
map to determine its exact trajectory and landing
launch of the Cislunar Autonomous Positioning
site, assisting Perseverance to touch down in a safe
System Technology Operations and Navigation
location within Jezero crater.
Experiment (CAPSTONE) lunar mission, which will
reduce risk for future spacecraft by validating
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
90
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.4: Demonstrate new technologies and cross-cutting capabilities that are
of direct interest and use to NASA missions, as well as the commercial space
sector.
Major milestones (e.g., key decision points, major re-
NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
views, and technology demonstrations) completed.
(STMD) offers prizes for meeting key technolo-
gy challenges, while reaching out to non-tradi-
tional NASA partners. STMD also provides an
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
opportunity for small businesses and research
Target
N/A
N/A
7
6
institutions to participate in government-spon-
sored research and development efforts in key
Achieved
N/A
N/A
technology areas.
Rating
N/A
N/A
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
91
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.4 [Completed at the end of FY 2021]: Spur technology development
through engagement with the commercial sector and the general public.
Critical milestones achieved for two programs supporting
the performance goal.
NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
(STMD) offers prizes for meeting key technolo-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
gy challenges, while reaching out to non-tradi-
Year
tional NASA partners. STMD also provides an
Target
3
3
opportunity for small businesses and research
Achieved
3
3
institutions to participate in government-spon-
sored research and development efforts in key
Rating
Green
Green
technology areas.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
awards, and 64 Phase III awards. Our investments
Critical milestones for FY 2021
continue to demonstrate examples of infusion into
NASA missions and other applications. For exam-
1.
Conduct 42 NASA challenges, prize competitions, and
crowdsourcing activities.
ple, the Roll-Out Solar Array (ROSA) was awarded
2. Advance 45 Small Business Innovative Research/
several funding opportunities, including numerous
Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR)
SBIRs that allowed a small company to go from an
technologies beyond Phase II.
innovative idea to designing successful ground and
3. Manifest 16 payloads on commercial suborbital
flight demonstrations on the International Space
flights for testing.
Station (ISS). Since then, ROSA has been deployed
on the ISS to supplement the legacy arrays, will be
the main power source for Power and Propulsion
FY 2021 Performance Progress
Element/Gateway, and has been infused into the
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this
Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART) mission.
Performance Goal by exceeding the targets for all
NASA also competitively selected 36 payloads from
three supporting critical activities.
industry and academia for flight on commercial
NASA started 52 new Prize, Challenge, and
flight vehicles to achieve Agency priorities through
Crowdsourcing (PCC) activities and continued 13
its Flight Opportunities program, exceeding the
activities that started prior to FY 2021. Of the new
target of 16. One example of these payloads was
challenges started, 28 were through the NASA@
a that flew to suborbital space on Virgin Galactic's
WORK platform, which provides NASA employees
first fully crewed spaceflight.
an unconventional and inventive way to share
knowledge and advance projects. Exciting public
challenges that started in FY 2021 included the
Break the Ice Lunar Challenge designed to help
NASA excavate ice on the Moon; the Deep Space
Food Challenge in partnership with the Canadian
Space Agency to help bring innovative food produc-
tion technologies to space and here on Earth; and
the NASA TechRise Student Challenge in partner-
ship with the Flight Opportunities Program.
NASA provided opportunities for small, highly inno-
vative companies and research institutions through
the SBIR/STTR program. We created 110 post-Phase
II opportunities, compared to the targeted 45
opportunities, including 35 Phase II-E awards, six
Civilian Commercialization Readiness Pilot Program
opportunities, five Lunar Sequential Phase Il
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
92
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.1.5: Ensure American global leadership in space technology innovations
through increased partnering with industry, broadening the base of inno-
vation, and demonstrating key lunar surface and deep space technologies.
(Agency Priority Goal)
NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
Critical milestones achieved for two programs supporting
(STMD) offers prizes for meeting key technolo-
the performance goal.
gy challenges, while reaching out to non-tradi-
tional NASA partners. STMD also provides an
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
opportunity for small businesses and research
Year
institutions to participate in government-spon-
Target
N/A
N/A
4
4
sored research and development efforts in key
Achieved
N/A
N/A
technology areas.
Rating
N/A
N/A
Critical activities for FY 2022
1. Final assembly of the Cislunar Autonomous
Positioning System Technology Operations and
Navigation Experiment (CAPSTONE) spacecraft in
preparation for pre-shipment testing.
2.
Complete Solar Electric Propulsion (SEP) Critical
Design Review (CDR).
3.
Deliver the Polar Resources Ice Mining Experiment
(PRIME)-1 to Intuitive Machines for integration with
their Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS)
lander, in preparation for their mission.
4.
Complete 3 early design milestones for Cryogenic
Fluid Management (CFM) Tipping Point projects.
Critical activities for FY 2023
1.
Transition 3 SBIR/STTR sequentials planned to be
completed in CY 2022 to stakeholder programs for
planned follow-on use/development and integration
into future systems and demonstrations.
2.
Deliver the LTE Proximity Communications Tipping
Point with Nokia to Intuitive Machines for integration
to their CLPS Lander.
3.
Complete Environmental Testing for the Cooperative
Autonomous Distributed Robotic Explorers (CADRE).
4.
Initiate primary mission operations of the Deep
Space Optical Communications (DSOC).
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
93
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
2.2.2 [Completed at the end of FY 2021]: Commence lunar surface technolo-
gy demonstrations to enable a sustainable lunar surface exploration strategy.
Critical milestones achieved for two programs supporting
the performance goal.
NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
(STMD) offers prizes for meeting key technolo-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
gy challenges, while reaching out to non-tradi-
Year
(APG)
tional NASA partners. STMD also provides an
Target
3
2
opportunity for small businesses and research
Achieved
3
1
institutions to participate in government-spon-
Rating
Yellow
Yellow
sored research and development efforts in key
technology areas.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
Due to a delayed vendor selection for Commercial
List of development milestones for FY 2021
Lunar Payload Services (CLPS), NASA adjusted Polar
1.
Complete Precision Landing suborbital demonstra-
Resource Ice Mining Experiment (PRIME)-1 hard-
tion.
ware completion and delivery deadlines accord-
2.
Prepare hardware for flight demonstration for lunar
ingly, extending this milestone to late FY 2022.
polar water mining technology.
PRIME-1 is currently preparing hardware for a flight
demonstration on the second Intuitive Machines
FY 2021 Performance Progress
(IM-2) CLPS mission to the south polar region near
Shackleton crater. The hardware for the flight
NASA completed one of the two targeted mile-
consists of two instruments with high technology
stones in FY 2021, resulting in a Yellow rating for
readiness levels (TRLs); Mass Spectrometer observ-
this Performance Goal. * We anticipate completing
ing lunar operations (MSolo) and The Regolith
the second milestone during FY 2022.
and Ice Drill for Exploring New Terrain (TRIDENT).
Both instruments, which are not currently experi-
In a great example of NASA and industry work-
encing any technical delays, are being fabricated
ing together, Blue Origin's Deorbit, Descent and
and assembled, with completion expected in the
Landing Sensors Tipping Point (BODDL-TP) and
third quarter of FY 2022. Following completion,
Safe and Precise Landing - Integrated Capabilities
the instruments will go through verification and
Evolution (SPLICE), both successfully launched
validation testing and will be delivered to the CLPS
and landed aboard Blue Origin's New Shepard
vendor in the fourth quarter of FY 2022.
(NS-13) mission in October 2020 and August 2021.
These two flight tests were under the Tipping Point
*In January 2021, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
discontinued public reporting Government-wide on Agency Pri-
partnership and demonstrated successful flight
ority Goals. NASA continued performance tracking and reporting
performance of a Blue Origin Navigation sys-
on the Lunar Surface Technology Demonstrations high-priority
tem, a camera-based system for Terrain Relative
area as a Performance Goal with some changes approved by
Navigation (TRN), a commercial Doppler lidar
OMB.
velocimeter, and a dedicated computing sys-
tem hosting advanced guidance and navigation
algorithms for precision landing. One of the five
technologies tested, a NASA Doppler lidar sen-
sor, experienced an anomaly; a review board has
been formed to identify the underlying anomaly
cause, recommend a resolution, and document
essons-learned to better inform future flights. The
overall success of these demonstrations increases
the maturity of precision landing technologies for
use onboard future missions to the Moon and
beyond.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
94
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
Strategic Objective 3.2
Drive efficient and sustainable aviation.
LEAD OFFICE
Air transportation is an integral part of modern
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate (ARMD)
life, providing safe, affordable, and convenient
GOAL LEADER
travel to the public. Consequently, it has become
William Harrison, Portfolio Analysis & Management Office,
an integral part of the U.S. and global economy. In
Director, ARMD
a 2020 economic impact report published by the
Federal Aviation Administration, air transportation
Budget
provided $78 billion of positive trade balance for
FY
$M
the U.S. manufacturing sector, 10.9 million direct
and indirect jobs and 21.3 billion tons of freight by
Op Plan
2021
$828.7
the U.S. airlines culminating in $1.8 trillion of total
Requested
2022
$914.8
U.S. economic activity (8.6 percent of the 2018 U.S.
Gross Domestic Product). Of the 10.9 million jobs,
Requested
2023
$971.5
over one million were high-quality manufactur-
2024
$990.9
ing jobs. Nearly every product created and pur-
chased today (from toys to groceries) is touched
2025
$1,010.7
by aviation in some way. Speed, convenience, and
Outyear
2026
$1,030.9
economic benefits from air transportation are
the primary factors in its rapid growth; benefits
2027
$1,051.5
that have been even more important during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Below: NASA and industry partners are working towards a future that sees aviation meet cleaner sustainability standards. To that end, new designs for the
airplanes of tomorrow, such as the Transonic Truss-Braced Wing (TTBW) concept shown in the image above, are currently being tested by researchers and
engineers. The TTBW is essentially a classic tube-and-wing passenger aircraft whose wings are extremely long and thin - so much that they need a little
help to hold them up. By narrowing the thickness of the wings and extending their length, drag is reduced, and 5-10% less fuel is burned than comparable
narrowbody aircraft. This image was created using data from a computational fluid dynamics simulation - essentially a virtual wind tunnel test. The red
and
orange areas represent higher drag, and the green and blue areas represent lower drag. Note the beautifully sleek green-blue color of the wings - the colors
of Earth. Image Credit: NASA/Craig Hunter
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
NASA's research contributes significantly to the
aviation sector in improving its safety, efficiency,
and resulting economic well-being of the Nation.
Our role is to reduce the risk inherent in innovative
concepts. We explore early-stage concepts and
ideas, develop new aviation technologies and air
traffic operational procedures, and demonstrate
their potential in a relevant environment. The
Agency is steadfast in its commitment to cut-
ting-edge research and technology development
and demonstration to assure U.S. competitiveness
in the aviation sector.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
96
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.2.1: Develop solutions that will enable the integration of a diverse range of
non-traditional vehicles and operations into the National Airspace System by
means of a scalable, service-oriented architecture.
Annual performance activities completed.
The Airspace Operations and Safety Program,
part of the Aeronautics Research Mission
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Directorate, is working with partners to con-
Target
2
1
2
1
ceive and develop the Next Generation Air
Transportation, or NextGen, technologies to
Achieved
1
1
further improve safety, capacity, and efficien-
Rating
Yellow
Green
cy in the national airspace.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
may accept, in this case they generally looking for
the either the most fuel efficient route or an option
Development milestones for FY 2021
that gets them on the trajectory that will meet
1.
Transfer knowledge and technology (i.e., digital
their time constraints. Once accepted by air traffic
services) that enable broad adoption of a NASA-
control, the reroute would be issued via the Federal
developed Trajectory Option Set (TOS) based digital
Aviation Administration's Airborne Reroute system.
re-routing concept.
These reroutes produced 12.4 hours of delay sav-
ings while saving more than 50,800 pounds of fuel.
Performance activities for FY 2022
1. Develop a community-supported Sky for All Vision of
NASA presented field demonstration results during
the future aviation system.
the September 2021 ATD-2 / Multi-Airport session
2.
Conduct National Campaign-1 (NC-1) and demon-
of the ATD Project Technical Interchange Meeting
strate operational scenarios with industry partners
(TIM). Panelists for this TIM session included Field
across vehicle, airspace, and infrastructure to inform
Demo Partners (i.e., airlines and NATCA) and stake-
requirements for a UAM Maturity Level-1 (UML-1)
holders from the Collaborative Decision Making
system.
(CDM) community. During the session, panelists
Performance activities for FY 2023
described their experience using the ATD-2 system,
1.
Identify and test community-based rules for strategic
positive impacts on North Texas airspace opera-
conflict management.
tions and their desire to see the technology further
developed and implemented on a nation-wide
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.2.1 under
basis. Six Machine Learning services developed and
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
publicly released under this effort were described
during the ATD-2 / Digital Services session of the
FY 2021 Performance Progress
ATD Project TIM.
In FY 2021, the NASA Aircraft Technology
Demonstrations (ATD)-2 project successfully com-
pleted formal data collection for the 2021 stormy
season, ending as planned in September 2021, with
107 flights re-routed using the ATD system.
The ATD-2 system is an Integrated Arrival
Departure Surface (IADS) Metroplex Coordinator,
which is a tool designed to provide benefits when
the aircraft demand exceeds the capacity of an
airport. Testing was conducted in the Dallas-Fort
Worth Metroplex environment during the stormy
season and allowed airline dispatchers to easily
propose in-flight reroutes by selecting from sys-
tem-generated Trajectory Option Sets (TOS), which
are a list of potential trajectories that a flight crew
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
97
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.2.2: Demonstrate the ability to reduce the perceived loudness of son-
ic booms and enable future industry innovation in commercial supersonic
aircraft.
The Integrated Aviation Systems and
Annual performance activities completed.
Advanced Air Vehicles programs, part of
NASA's Aeronautics Research Mission
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Directorate, are working together to validate
Year
design approaches for quiet supersonic air-
Target
1
2
2
1
craft and develop data to support the defini-
Achieved
0
0
tion of a standard for acceptable noise.
Rating
Red
Red
to December 2021. Challenges included prime
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
contractor workforce staffing and performance,
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
slow progress on wiring installations, system
checkout schedule slips, COVID-19 related on-site
limitations, and supply chain delays. Despite
Development milestone for FY 2021
these challenges, the build quality of the LBFD
1. Low Boom Flight Demonstrator aircraft ready to ship
aircraft is excellent and all the key performance
from Palmdale to Lockheed Martin (LM) Fort Worth.
parameters are being met. NASA mitigation actions
2.
Deliver a validated F-15-based test capability that
included teaming with the prime contractor to
enables precise, near-field probing of the LBFD shock
assist with some design and testing tasks, negoti-
wave structure.
ating incentive fee and cost sharing features in the
Performance activities FY 2022
contract, supporting replanning with more realistic
assumptions, providing NASA experts on-site, and
1. First flight of the Low Boom Flight Demonstrator
(LBFD) aircraft.
inserting significant NASA executive-level engage-
ment with prime contractor counterparts.
2. Deliver a validated F-15-based test capability that
enables in-flight Schlieren images of the LBFD shock
NASA remains highly engaged with the prime
structure.
contractor at executive and project levels to
Performance activities FY 2023
assess risks to First Flight. Prime contractor plans
1. Demonstrate the ability of the X-59 aircraft to pro-
target First Flight for the LBFD aircraft in August
duce an acceptably low perceived sonic boom level
2022. According to NASA's assessment, a First Flight
that allows the community response testing phase of
in December 2022 is likely if prime contractor per-
the LBFD mission to commence.
formance does not improve and COVID-19 impacts
continue.
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.2.2 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
The COVID-19 pandemic also impacted shock
sensing probe (SSP) system development, work on
FY 2021 Performance Progress
F-15D wing fatigue inspections, and instrumenta-
NASA did not complete either annual performance
tion system development and integration. Factors
activities as planned for the LBFD aircraft largely
included Center access and external vendor work-
due to contractor challenges and, to a lesser
force restrictions due to COVID-19 and supply
degree, COVID-19 pandemic impacts, resulting in a
chain delays. The SSP will be used to accurately
red rating. According to NASA's assessment, there
probe and collect data on the characteristics of
is still margin in the schedule for aircraft accep-
X-59 shockwaves and confirm whether they match
tance and completion of acoustic validation by the
Agency models to be able to reduce the sound of a
end of this multiyear Performance Goal in FY 2024.
sonic boom to a "quiet thump".
Contractor delays resulted in a slip of the LBFD air-
Initial SSP flights, using the Airborne Location
craft milestone to ship the aircraft from Palmdale
Integrating Geospatial Inertial Navigation Systems
to Lockheed Martin (LM) Fort Worth, Texas for
(ALIGNS) used to precisely position the aircraft for
structural proof loads and fuel systems calibra-
SSP measurements, started in the fourth quarter
tion testing. The date shifted from August 2021
of FY 2021, and demonstrated that SSP meets the
X-59 static pressure resolution requirement and
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
98
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
that ALIGNS provided sufficient coverage and range
between two aircraft.
By the end of FY 2021, 87 percent of major F-15D
instrumentation components and pallet assemblies
were completed or in-work. F-15D wing inspec-
tions, repairs and painting will be completed at
Warner Robins Air Logistics Complex and will be
received by NASA Armstrong shortly after FY 2021,
where fuselage inspections and repairs continue.
Right: The X-59 QueSST (Quiet
SuperSonic Technology) aircraft will
fly at supersonic speeds above com-
munities during the Low-Boom Flight
Demonstration mission, generating
sonic "thumps" instead of booms.
Image credit: NASA/Lockheed
Martin
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
99
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.2.3: Advance airframe and engine technologies to enable the development
of future generations of ultra-efficient air vehicles that minimize environmen-
tal impact including electric aircraft propulsion concepts.
Annual performance activities completed.
The
Advanced
Air
Vehicles
and
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Transformative Aeronautics Concepts pro-
Year
grams, part of NASA's Aeronautics Research
Target
5
2
5
3
Mission Directorate, evaluate, develop, and
test technologies and capabilities for ultra-ef-
Achieved
2
1
ficient aircrafts.
Rating
Yellow
Yellow
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2.
Design, build, test, evaluate a suite of novel manu-
Green
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
facturing technologies to TRL-5 that are relevant for
high-rate, lightweight metallic fuselage manufactur-
ing.
Development milestones for FY 2021
3.
Critical Design Review (CDR) complete of at least
1. Design and fabricate a low-noise variant of the High-
one integrated, 1MW class electric powertrain flight
Lift Common Research Model and conduct a wind
demonstration.
tunnel experiment to perform acoustic measure-
ments of innovative slat noise reduction concepts
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.2.3 under
entailing realistic materials and component sizes.
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
2.
Award industry contract(s) for 1MW powertrain flight
demonstration(s).
FY 2021 Performance Progress
Performance activities for FY 2022
NASA partially achieved the FY 2021 target for this
1. Establish feasibility for megawatt, kilovolt fault man-
agement devices for electrified aircraft propulsion
Performance Goal to advance airframe and engine
(Technology Readiness Level [TRL]-4).
technologies by fully achieving annual performance
2.
Design and fabricate a semi-span model of an
activity 1 and being slightly behind the planned
advanced Transonic Truss Braced Wing (TTBW)
schedule for annual performance activity 2.
configuration, conduct a wind tunnel test to further
investigate the buffet boundary of the configuration,
In FY 2021, NASA completed a wind tunnel test of
and compare experimental results with the compu-
a high efficiency aircraft configuration known as
tational predictions of structural response and buffet
the Transonic Truss-Braced Wing (TTBW). The test
boundary to improve (or calibrate) methods for this
results will reduce uncertainty in TTBW perfor-
non-traditional wing architecture.
mance and increase confidence in the estimated
3.
Complete screening of materials and manufacturing
fuel burn benefits. In addition, an independent
technologies to be considered under the High-rate
assessment of the configuration was completed by
Composite Aircraft Manufacturing (HiCAM) effort;
NASA that corroborates industry's fuel-burn esti-
requirements definition for a full-scale, compo-
mate.
nent-level test article; and evaluate high-rate mate-
rials and manufacturing concepts at the coupon and
During the fiscal year, a viable airframe noise-re-
element levels.
duction concept was designed, fabricated, and
4.
Preliminary design complete for at least one inte-
demonstrated in a large-scale wind tunnel test
grated, 1MW class electric powertrain flight demon-
where it was shown to have significant acoustic
stration.
benefits. In the area of advanced aircraft engine
5.
Complete X-57 Mod Il flight campaign and release
technologies, NASA demonstrated improvements
performance analysis.
in compressor efficiencies that could enable a 12.
Performance activities for FY 2023
percent reduction in fuel consumption.
1. Design, build, test, evaluate a suite of electrified air-
NASA also made significant progress in enabling
craft propulsion (EAP) components to TRL-6 that are
fuel burn reductions through propulsion system
relevant for demonstrators and small EAP aircraft.
electrification. This work included first-of-a-kind
altitude tests of Megawatt (MW)-class components
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
100
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
and integrated powertrains and completion of the
FY 2021 Electric Powertrain Flight Demonstration
(EPFD) annual performance activity. The Source
Evaluation Board selection process is complete
with awards made in the fourth quarter of FY
2021. NASA selected two U.S. companies to per-
form integrated MW-class powertrain system
ground and flight demonstrations to validate their
concepts. The awards are hybrid firm fixed-price/
cost-share for work conducted over the next five
years. NASA rated this activity Yellow because the
planned schedule was to complete the awards
during the third quarter of FY 2021.
Below: Instrumentation technician Michael Hodgins performs installation measures on the trans-sonic truss-braced wing (TTBW) model at Langley Research
Center's 14x22 subsonic wind tunnel. The unique design of the aircraft's wings reduces drag during flight, which in turn reduces fuel consumption by up
to 10 percent. This concept is part of an ongoing initiative by NASA, industry partners, and academia to make the future of aviation more environmentally
friendly
through the Sustainable Flight National Partnership (SFNP). The SFNP will expand research for sustainable aviation by developing and testing new
technologies for aircraft, new automation tools for greener and safer airspace operations, and sustainable energy options for aircraft propulsion. The TTBW
will undergo a variety of aerodynamic testing as researchers continue to test key flight components such as increased lift and reduced drag.
Image
Credit:
NASA/Langley Research Center/David Meade
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
101
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.2.4: Advance airframe and propulsion technologies to enable the develop-
ment of vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) vehicles that minimize noise and
maximize safety.
The Advanced Air Vehicles and Integrated
Annual performance activities completed.
Aviation Systems programs, part of NASA's
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate,
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
demonstrate and deliver tools, technologies,
Year
and flight operations methods for safe, quiet,
Target
1
1
1
1
and affordable vertical lift air vehicles.
Achieved
1
1
Rating
Green
Green
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) certification Effective
Perceived Noise Levels for takeoff, flyover, and
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
approach were used for the noise metrics of the
trade studies.
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
Green
The concept aircraft in this study are shown to
Development milestone for FY 2021
achieve reductions in noise relative the initial
1. Complete conceptual design and sizing trade studies
design points, with changes in mission perfor-
for Vertical Take Off and Landing (VTOL) Urban Air
mance and cost as a consequence. Many of the
Mobility (UAM) configurations.
designs are predicted to be tens of effective per-
ceived noise decibels (EPNdB) quieter in the certifi-
Performance activities for FY 2022
cation metrics than existing helicopters. The results
1. Assessment of Urban Air Mobility vehicle noise
were documented in a paper, "Practical Conceptual
operating in realistic trajectories with a second
Design of Quieter Urban VTOL Aircraft," written by
generation (Gen-2) noise-power-distance database
that includes loading, thickness, and broadband self-
Chris Silva and Wayne Johnson, which was pre-
noise for a mix of vehicles.
sented at the Vertical Flight Society Forum 77, May
2021. The paper will provide valuable design guid-
Performance activities for FY 2023
ance for the UAM industry
1.
Conduct a workshop open to US industry to foster
transition and provide training for best-practice
use of NASA-developed toolchain for Advanced Air
Mobility (AAM) and Urban Air Mobility (UAM) aero-
mechanics and acoustic analysis.
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.2.4 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA made planned progress on this Performance
Goal by completing design trade studies of noise
versus performance for three UAM aircraft config-
urations.
In FY 2021, NASA continued development of a
conceptual design toolchain that enabled the
assessment of performance and noise of UAM
aircraft compared with a quiet, single main-rotor
helicopter. The UAM aircraft included a quadrotor,
side-by-side helicopter, and lift+cruise aircraft, all
designed to carry six passengers. These aircraft
represent characteristics of emerging UAM aircraft
being developed by UAM companies. The Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA)/ European Union
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
102
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.2.5: Define and demonstrate solutions that predict, identify, and mitigate
emerging safety risks and address the national need to safely transform the
National Airspace System.
Annual performance activities completed.
The Airspace Operations and Safety Program,
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
part of the Aeronautics Research Mission
Year
Directorate, develops real-time safety mon-
Target
2
1
1
1
itoring and assurance system technologies
and capabilities to enhance air transportation
Achieved
2
1
safety, capacity, and efficiency.
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
external use and evaluation by partners and the
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
industry.
Development milestones for FY 2021
For traditional airline operations, the project
1. Evaluate costs and benefits given a demonstrated
demonstrated utilizing two anomaly detection
automated evaluation of safety risk over multiple
algorithms that allow for identification of previously
simultaneous events utilizing non-traditional data.
unknown anomalies/risk types. These demon-
strations used historical airline flight data. The
Performance activities for FY 2022
SWS project continues to pursue access to active
1.
Complete simulations and flight tests of automated
data feeds going to an airline partner's operations
in-flight safety/risk assessment with alternate proac-
center and will determine how those data can be
tive and fail-safe mitigation methods.
used to identify anomalies and precursors using
the algorithms that the project has developed. A
Performance activities for FY 2023
NASA partner is developing airline operations cen-
1. Analyze aircraft data and make recommendations
ter software with appropriate anomaly detection
for applying NASA's developed monitoring, assess-
algorithms integrated into it and ways to visualize
ment, and mitigation techniques to future aviation
the resulting anomalies and risks
operations.
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.2.5 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA made planned progress on this Performance
Goal by completing the FY 2021 activity. During
the fiscal year, NASA's System Wide Safety (SWS)
project successfully developed a framework that
integrates risk across hazards as part of the in-time
system-wide safety assurance capabilities for
highly autonomous emerging operations. NASA has
incorporated multiple key hazards, such as wind
gusts, propulsion degradations, and proximity to
buildings and populated areas, into the computa-
tion of a set of risk metrics and algorithms that may
be used during pre-flight planning or in-flight. The
project tested these automated risk assessment
techniques in simulation using flight logs. A sub-
set will be demonstrated during live flight testing
in FY 2022. Costs, benefits, and gaps were identi-
fied for the most mature of the techniques and a
technology transfer path was established to enable
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
103
INNOVATE
Strategic Goal 3
3.2.6: Contribute toward the safe introduction of on-demand Urban Air
Mobility (UAM) and other emerging operations by developing, applying,
demonstrating, and validating advanced autonomy and automation technolo-
gies and providing methods or research results that support certification of
autonomous systems.
The Integrated Aviation Systems
and
Annual performance activities completed.
Advanced Air Vehicles programs, part
of NASA's Aeronautics Research Mission
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Directorate, are developing technologies and
Year
capabilities to enable autonomous aircraft
Target
N/A
3
3
3
and urban air mobility.
Achieved
N/A
3
Rating
N/A
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
Performance activities for FY 2021
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this multi-year
1. Develop an initial Urban Air Mobility airspace man-
performance goal by completing analysis of the
agement system.
performance data of the UAS traffic management
2.
Evaluate the use of run-time monitoring as a tool for
(UTM) system and related technologies, which
the assurance of untrusted components in a system.
demonstrated that a highly automated, cloud-
3.
Conduct National Campaign (NC) Developmental
based architecture that safely enables low-altitude
Testing (or NC-DT), perform demonstration of NC
UAS operations is feasible. Over the previous four
operational scenarios, and collect data from flight
years, the project followed a risk-based approach
demonstrations and simulations in preparation for
to develop and test the UTM system and matured
NC-1.
it through successively more capable Technical
Capability Levels (TCLs). This culminated in the
Performance activities for FY 2022
TCL 4 testing in the highly complex urban environ-
1.
Enable informed investment decisions for future
ments of Reno, Nevada, and Corpus Christi, Texas,
development of increasingly automated vehicles and
airspace operations.
as well as focused in-board technology evaluations
at NASA centers in FY 2019.
2.
Delivery of draft evidence and recommendations
for the robustness of failover plans; and the use of
The results from those tests confirmed the concept
run-time monitoring to the FAA, Unmanned Aircraft
Safety Team, and Flight Safety Foundation that can
and provided new insights into industry's ability to
be used in regulatory guidance to industry and in
develop and provide traffic management services
standards committees.
for UAS operations, and to interface with new FAA
3.
Demonstration through flight testing of automated
systems that can integrate into the traditional air
aircraft vertiport operations using operational sce-
traffic management infrastructure. Through tech-
narios.
nology transfers, the UTM results are now inform-
ing the FAA in their testing in this year's UTM Pilot
Performance activities for FY 2023
Program, as well as the longer-term UTM imple-
1. Develop requirements for future Air Traffic
mentation plan for the Nation. Industry standards
Management systems of increasingly automated
bodies, such as American Society for Testing and
vehicles and airspace operations.
Materials (ASTM) and Joint Authorities for UAS
2.
Demonstrate algorithms for checking safety stan-
Rulemaking on Unmanned Systems (JARUS), are
dards for systems relying on untrusted components
also incorporating the UTM results. Additionally,
for autonomous surface operations and autono-
the UTM service-based architecture is serving as
mous drone flight operations.
the foundation for enabling advanced air mobility
3.
Demonstrate automated aircraft vertiport opera-
solutions in urban environments and high-altitude
tions using operational scenarios in the Integrated
UAS traffic.
Automation Systems-1 (IAS-1) flight test.
This Performance Goal was aligned to 3.2.6 under
As part of project closeout, the UTM project has
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
completed an extensive lessons-learned collection
and archived key documentation that will benefit
current and future projects and research efforts.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
104
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
Enhance capabilities and operations to
catalyze current and future mission success.
VASA
An aerial view of the Central Campus Headquarters Building and a close-up view the NASA insignia in front of the entrance in the industrial area at NASA's
Kennedy Space Center in Florida on Jan. 13, 2021. The facility anchors the multi-user spaceport's Central Campus. More than 500 civil service and contrac-
tor employees will be based in the 200,000-square-foot buildingImage credit: NASA/Ben Smegelsky/Cory Huston
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
Strategic Objective 4.1
Attract and develop a talented and diverse workforce.
LEAD OFFICE
NASA will modernize how we attract, hire, sup-
Mission Support Directorate (MSD) and the Office of
port, lead, and retain the quality, diversity, and
Diversity and Equal Opportunity (ODEO)
depth of talent necessary for mission success.
GOAL LEADER
Recent experiences and lessons from the pan-
Robert Gibbs, Associate Administrator, MSD
demic, as well as nationwide workforce and
workplace trends, will inform and help NASA
Budget
institutionalize and improve our hybrid work
FY
$M
practices. NASA's modernization strategy will
also address other factors such as an increasing
Op Plan
2021
$97.4
number of retirement-eligible civil servants over
Requested
2022
$104.3
the next five years and increasing competition
for highly qualified science, technology, engineer-
Requested
2023
$108.4
ing, and mathematics (STEM) talent, especially as
2024
$110.6
more commercial entities enter the field.
2025
$112.8
While NASA has long enjoyed a reputation of
Outyear
2026
$115.0
attracting top talent; we recognize the value of
recruiting and employing a diverse workforce
2027
$117.3
cannot be understated. The Agency is better
positioned to fulfill its current and future missions
when we intentionally invite people with different
backgrounds, who show promise and potential,
Below: Kathryn Oriti of the Science and Space Technology Systems Branch at NASA's Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, left, oversees 2017 Pathways
intern Naia Butler-Craig as she builds hardware for the Advanced Electric Bus CubeSat. We strategically hire our Pathways Interns based on long-term
potential and alignment with NASA's future workforce needs. Specializing in multi-semester experiences, the Pathways Internship Program prepares stu-
dents for a career at NASA and offers a direct pipeline to full-time employment at NASA upon graduation. Image Credit: NASA/Bridget Caswell
ADVANCE
-
Strategic Goal 4
into spaces to inspire and challenge us to think
and work differently.
In 2020, NASA added Inclusion to our Core Values,
recognizing that inclusion is intrinsic to our
work, our relationships, and our achievements.
Inclusion increases collaboration and productivity.
Additionally, it encourages employees to go above-
and-beyond to achieve our goals. Also, all people
want to feel a sense of inclusion and belonging.
Inclusion happens when people can have psy-
chological safety in being their authentic selves,
sharing their ideas, knowledge, creativity, and
innovation. The combination of all our values and
the emphasis on Inclusion lets NASA strive to have
a healthy culture and be an employer of choice.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
107
-
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.1.1: Improve diversity in the Agency's overall civil service workforce
composition and occupations and across employee lifecycles.
Number of efforts completed (plans and analyses, as well
as assessments of their impact on reducing triggers and
The Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity
barriers).
(ODEO) leads diversity and civil rights policies,
programs and services, enabling the universe
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
of available talent to contribute inclusively
Year
and equitably to NASA. Diversity, equity, inclu-
Target
3
2
sion, and accessibility efforts Agency-wide
Achieved
have been streamlined, and where appro-
priate, aligned to ODEO through the Mission
Rating
Support Directorate's Mission Support Future
Architecture Program (MAP).
Efforts for FY 2022
1. Complete the multi-phase barrier analysis¹ of (1)
Asian American and Pacific Islanders and (2) women
in NASA physical science occupations and produce
ship positions (Division Directors, Deputy Division
a final report identifying challenges and corrective
Directors, and Associate Directors, as well as front
actions addressing each challenge.²
office hires) from 2017-2021, and a description of
2.
Complete a baseline assessment of diversity in
any efforts intended to increase the diversity of
NASA's Mission Directorates based on staffing
Mission Directorate leadership; (c) the extent to
(including leadership positions).³
which policies and goals for increasing workforce
3.
Complete an analysis of responses to the Federal
diversity vary by Mission Directorate; (d) the peo-
Employee Viewpoint Survey question on preventing
ple responsible and accountable for increasing
harassment in the workplace4 to identify triggers
workforce diversity for each Mission Directorate
affecting an inclusive, fair, and safe work environ-
and a description of how they are accountable; (e)
ment important for workforce retention.
Mission Directorates' plans over the next year to
Efforts for FY 2023
increase diversity and inclusion in its staffing at
1.
Complete analysis of applicant flow data to deter-
NASA Headquarters.
mine if barriers exist in recruitment or hiring of
4 The 2020 and 2021 Federal Employee Viewpoint
individuals from underserved and underrepresented
communities.
Survey (FEVS) included the question: "NASA leaders
take proactive steps to prevent harassment in the
2.
Issue updated badging and security procedures5
(with NASA's Office of Protective Services) to remove
workplace (for example, senior leadership mes-
any barriers to equal employment opportunity and
sages to the workforce, use of posters and other
accessibility for LGBTQIA+ individuals who require
communication materials, training, dialogues, or
access to NASA facilities.
similar activities)." NASA will analyze the 2020 and
2021 employee responses to this question, pro-
1 NASA's processes for barrier identification and
vided on a five-point scale (e.g., Agree, Strongly
elimination are in accordance with Section II of the
Agree), by demographics and organizational code.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's
Results will inform efforts for a second Agency-wide
Instructions to Federal Agencies for EEO MD-715.
Anti-Harassment Campaign.
2 NASA will complete Phases 5-7 of a barrier anal-
For 2020, 10,588 employees (64 percent of NASA's
ysis of women and Asian American and Pacific
16,549 eligible workforce) responded to the FEVS.
Islanders within physical science occupations when
For 2021, 12,094 employees (68 percent of NASA's
compared to the relevant civilian labor force, as
17,746 eligible workforce) responded to the FEVS.
described in Appendix B of the NASA Model Equal
Employment Opportunity Program Status Report:
5
NASA will review badging and security procedures,
FY 2020.
developed in accordance with NASA Procedural
Requirement 1600.1A (NASA Security Program
3 NASA will collect and analyze the following: (a)
Procedural Requirements), to determine where
data metrics, and targets that are used by the
revisions should be made to remove barriers.
Mission Directorates to assess workforce diversity
efforts; (b) demographics of newly hired or pro-
moted personnel into Mission Directorate leader-
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
108
ADVANCE
-
Strategic Goal 4
4.1.2: Decrease overall Agency time to hire.
Time between hiring need validation date and enter on
duty date for all hires, excluding Pathways and Senior
The Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer,
Executive Service (SES) hires, from the FY 2021 baseline
part of the Mission Support Directorate,
of 104 days to a long-term goal of 80 days.
helps NASA maintain an adaptable and skilled
workforce through strategic workforce plan-
Fiscal
2020 2021
2022
2023
2024 2025
ning, management services, and staff train-
Year
ing and development. Visit NASAPeople for
Decrease
Decrease
more information about the Human Capital
of 5%
of 5% or
Program, careers at NASA, and other work-
or more
more from
Target
force information.
from
FY 2022
baseline
actual
(TBD)
Achieved
Rating
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
109
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.4.1 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Sustain NASA employees' perceptions
of innovation climate, as measured by the Innovation-related questions on
the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS), through Human Capital pro-
grams and tools that support NASA
employees.
The Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity
(ODEO) leads diversity and civil rights policies,
Agency FEVS Innovation score.
programs and services, enabling the universe
of available talent to contribute inclusively and
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
equitably to NASA. ODEO is an Administrator
Staff Office.
Target
84%
84%
PG Discontinued
Achieved
White
White
Rating
White
White
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA was unable to assess progress toward achiev-
ing this Performance Goal in FY 2021 due to lack of
data resulting from changes to the 2021 FEVS.
In June 2020, the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM), which conducts the survey, announced that
it had reworked the survey-a measurement of
Federal employees' perceptions of workplace expe-
riences, leadership, and culture-to cut some of
the standard questions and add questions related
to the COVID pandemic. Among the questions cut
were the innovation-related questions used to
assess this Performance Goal The FEVS retained
key content widely used for strategic workforce
development, such as employee engagement and
satisfaction, to allow comparison of survey results
between 2021 and prior surveys.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
110
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.4.2 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Sustain or improve NASA employ-
ees' perceptions of unity and inclusion, as measured by the Unity Pulse
Survey, the New Inclusion Quotient (New IQ) index scores on the annual
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS), and through Diversity and Equal
Opportunity programs and tools that
support NASA employees.
The Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity
(ODEO) leads diversity and civil rights policies,
Agency FEVS New IQ Index score.
programs and services, enabling the universe
of available talent to contribute inclusively
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
and equitably to NASA. Diversity, equity, inclu-
Year
sion, and accessibility efforts Agency-wide
Target
70%
70%
have been streamlined, and where appro-
Unable to
priate, aligned to ODEO through the Mission
Achieved
assess
Support Directorate's Mission Support Future
Rating
White
White
Architecture Program (MAP).
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA was unable to assess progress toward achiev-
ing this performance goal in FY 2021 due to lack
of data. The FEVS historically was administered by
the Office of Personnel Management in late spring
or early summer. However, the 2021 FEVS was
administered after the close of fiscal year 2021 in
November and results will not be reported until
spring 2022. As a result, we cannot use the 2021
FEVS to assess FY 2021 performance.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
111
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.4.3 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Improve employees' perception of
NASA as an equal opportunity and anti-harassment workplace, as mea-
sured by the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS) questions focused
on equal employment opportunity (EEO) and anti-harassment compliance,
through customer service scores, and completion of NASA/MAP deliverables
for EEO compliance.
The Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity
Agency FEVS New IQ Index score. (Percentage of NASA
(ODEO) leads diversity and civil rights policies,
FEVS EEO and anti-harassment compliance scores).
programs and services, enabling the universe
of available talent to contribute inclusively and
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
equitably to NASA. ODEO is an Administrator
Year
Staff Office.
Target
75%
75%
Unable to
Achieved
assess
Rating
White
White
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA was unable to assess progress toward achiev-
ing this performance goal in FY 2021 due to lack
of data. The FEVS historically was administered by
the Office of Personnel Management in late spring
or early summer. However, the 2021 FEVS was
administered after the close of fiscal year 2021 in
November and results will not be reported until
spring 2022. As a result, we cannot use the 2021
FEVS to assess FY 2021 performance.
While data is not available from FEVS for FY 2021,
we have been working to improve our EEO com-
plaints processing procedures and timeliness. As
a result, we have decreased average processing
times for Final Agency Actions for procedural
dismissals and Final Agency Dismissals based on
merits
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
112
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
Strategic Objective 4.2
Transform mission support capabilities for the next era of
aerospace.
LEAD OFFICE
As NASA's missions evolve and increasingly inte-
Mission Support Directorate (MSD)
grate with industry, and hybrid workforces and
GOAL LEADER
workplaces become the norm, mission support
Robert Gibbs, Associate Administrator, MSD
requirements will change. In alignment with
NASA's Core Values, mission support's top priority
Budget
is ensuring mission success-safely and securely.
This is increasingly challenging with the grow-
FY
$M
ing complexity of our missions. Much of NASA's
Op Plan
2021
$3,276.4
infrastructure is from the Apollo-era. It is time to
Requested
2022
$3,326.5
re-build, modernize, and right-size NASA's mis-
sion-enabling capabilities.
Requested
2023
$3,515.8
To advance an environment of inclusion, integ-
2024
$3,586.2
rity, teamwork, and excellence required for the
2025 $3,658.0
Artemis era, we must strengthen our and mod-
Outyear
ernize our physical and information technology
2026 $3,731.1
(IT) infrastructure. NASA will focus on the follow-
2027
$3,805.8
ing three priority areas: strengthen NASA's Agency
Technical Authorities; modernize infrastructure
and technical capabilities, and support our work-
force and programs with secure, innovative
technology. This transformation will enable the
success of the entire Agency and our workforce.
Below: Nzinga Tull, Hubble systems anomaly response manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, works in the control room
on July 15, 2021, to restore Hubble to full science operations. Image Credit: NASA/Goddard/Rebecca Roth
ADVANCE
-
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.1: Minimize the number and severity of employee injuries and illnesses to
support the next era of aerospace.
The Office of Safety and Mission Assurance,
Number of fatalities or permanent disabling injuries.
Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer,
and Office of the Chief Engineer ensure safety
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024 2025
and mission success by providing independent
Year
oversight of NASA's programs and projects.
0.7
TBD
They are supported by the NASA Safety Center
TCIR
based on
Target
0
0
and the Katherine Johnson IV&V Facility
0.3
industry
DART
average
Achieved
0
0
Rating
Green
Green
*NASA determines the industry average for each Center using
the most recent Bureau of Labor Statistics data for the North
American Industry Classification System code used by the Center
to baseline safety performance. The target for this Performance
Goal is the average of the 10 NASA Centers for the total case
incident rate (TCIR) for injuries and illnesses and the days away,
restricted, or transferred (DART) due to injuries or illnesses.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.3.1 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
4.3.1: Achieve zero fatalities or permanent disabling
injuries to the public resulting from NASA activities.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target of zero fatalities
or disabling injuries to the public or NASA employ-
ees during the fiscal year as a result of NASA activi-
ties. There was extensive planning and execution of
risk mitigation controls prior to all aerospace flight
operations and potentially hazardous operations to
achieve this performance goal.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
114
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.2: Reduce damage to NASA assets (excluding launched flight hardware).
Level less than 5-year running average.
The Office of Safety and Mission Assurance,
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer,
Year
and Office of the Chief Engineer ensure safety
At or
At or
and mission success by providing independent
below
below
$3.8
$3.85M
5-year
oversight of NASA's programs and projects.
Target
$4.38M
million
average
They are supported by the NASA Safety Center
(5-year
(amount
and the Katherine Johnson IV&V Facility.
average)
TBD)
Achieved
$4.73M
$1.36M
Rating
Green
Green
*The NASA Safety Center analyzes non-mission damage mis-
haps reported by Centers to the NASA Mishap Information Sys-
tem. The 5-year median is based on this analysis.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.3.2 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
In FY 2021, NASA's non-mission-related damage
costs were $1.36 million. This is significantly below
the historical average (and FY 2021 target) of $4.38
million.
Costs Associated with Damage to NASA Assets, FY 2010-2021
$8.0
$7.48
$7.46
$6.0
$7.48
$4.61
$4.73
$5.26
$3.37
$3.83
$4.0
$4.22
$3.18
$3.63
$3.50
$4.02
$4.38
$2.13
$3.99
$1.34
$2.93
$4.15
$2.0
$3.05
$3.44
$4.18
$1.49
$1.36
$0.0
FY 2010
FY 2011
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
FY 2015
FY 2016
FY 2017
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
5-year running average costs of damage to NASA assets (excluding launched flight hardware)
Annual cost of damage to NASA assets (excluding launched flight hardware)
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
115
-
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.3: Ensure the health and safety of NASA astronauts and pilots.
Number of non-concurrence determinations and per-
centage of program variances.
The Office of Safety and Mission Assurance,
Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer,
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
and Office of the Chief Engineer ensure safety
Year
and mission success by providing independent
0 non-
0 non-
oversight of NASA's programs and projects.
concurrences;
concurrences;
Target
5% or
5% or
They are supported by the NASA Safety Center
fewer program
fewer program
and the Katherine Johnson IV&V Facility.
variances
variances
0 non-
concurrence
Achieved determinations;
implementation, prioritized amongst and between
0 program
variances
programs, or evaluated requests for waiver or risk
mitigations for all NASA programs that are in devel-
Rating
Green
Green
opment, in a time-critical manner.
*Successful execution of the mission requires adherence to
health and medical policies and standards and indicates that the
In addition, all measures to prevent COVID-19 infec-
Health and Medical Technical Authority has successfully support-
tion as directed by NASA's Office of the Chief Health
ed NASA flight programmatics through ongoing observation and
and Medical Officer were carefully implemented by
documentation of spaceflight and aeronautics activities and eval-
uation processes, as well as effective implementation of health
essential center civil service and contractor employ-
and medical standards and operations.
ees.
A concurrence is a documented agreement by a management
official that a proposed course of action associated with a pro-
gram or project position, issue resolution, request for relief from
HMTA standards, or program or project level requirements is ac-
ceptable.
For every NASA program with a potential impact to humans, the
HMTA coordinates with the cognizant program to provide the ap-
plicable flow-down of health and medical standards into program
requirements. The HMTA discusses with programs any non-con-
currences it issues at milestone and Key Decision Point reviews
and Joint Cost and Schedule Confidence Level (JCL) meetings.
A variance is any authorized and documented change from pre-
scribed technical requirements for a program or project.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.3.3 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
In FY 2021, the Health and Medical Technical
Authority (HMTA) issued no non-concurrences with
respect to major program milestones. In addition,
the HMTA issued fewer than 5 percent program
variances from the technical standards.
Meeting these targets enables NASA to accomplish
all its missions safely and in the most cost-effective
ways. In FY 2021, HMTA developed the appropri-
ate standards, assessed and advised programs on
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
116
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.4: Safeguard NASA's information resources through critical enhance-
ments to confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
Scoring is based on the mean of three scores, expressed
as a percentage, of NASA's critical priorities for imple-
The Office of the Chief Information Officer
menting the Federal Information Security Modernization
(OCIO) manages the information technolo-
Act (FISMA):
gy (IT) and data that enable NASA's missions.
1. High Value Asset (HVA) system access
Through strategic partnering across NASA and
management
with the Department of Homeland Security
2. Advanced network and data protections
(DHS), the OCIO is ensuring that critical mis-
through an Intrusion Prevention System
sion and infrastructure systems have resilient
(IPS) and an Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
cybersecurity, back-up, and disaster recovery
3. Hardware asset management (HWAM)
capabilities.
based on completed initiatives and projects
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Mitigation (CDM) cybersecurity capabilities across
Target
100%*
100%
100%**
100%**
the Agency. CDM sensors enable cybersecurity
personnel to identify assets on the network and
Achieved
70%
80%
vulnerabilities to remediate. As of September 2021,
Rating
Green
Green
NASA completed 100 percent installation of CDM
*Target represents the long-term exemplar for this Performance
sensors on the Agency's corporate systems, 93
Goal. NASA assesses annual progress based on interim targets.
percent on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL's)
*Achieve a 100% overall score,* using the mean of:
corporate systems, 94 percent on NASA mission
systems, 74 percent on JPL's mission systems.
HVA (FISMA requirement 2.7)
IPS & IDS (FISMA 3.4, 3.5), and
NASA is below target and is making progress on
HWAM (FISMA 3.9)
Hardware Asset Management and High Value Asset
(HVA) System Access Management. In FY 2021,
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
NASA implemented an HVA compliance dashboard
Yellow
Green
Red
Yellow
Yellow
in the Agency's Risk Information Security
Compliance System that allows Center and Agency
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.5.1 under
leadership to view HVA compliance status. The
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
increased visibility provided by the dashboard
enables greater compliance enforcement for
4.5.1: Safeguard NASA's data and IT assets by imple-
NASA's high value assets, which will lead to an
menting cybersecurity and privacy capabilities.
improved HVA System Access Management score.
Prior to availability of this dashboard, NASA did not
FY 2021 Performance Progress
have a consistent Agency-wide view of specific HVA
compliance.
NASA exceeded the incremental progress expected
in FY 2021 for the multi-year Performance Goal tar-
get of 100 percent of cybersecurity CAP goal targets
met. Beginning in July 2021, NASA met 8 of 10 (80
percent) of the cybersecurity CAP Goal targets on
Performance.gov, exceeding our target of meeting
at least 70 percent in FY 2021.
NASA achieved this performance by meeting the
Data Protection CAP Goal target and continued
implementation of Continuous Diagnostics and
1
Targets were set according to the IT Modernization Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goal supporting the Trump administration Presi-
dent's Management Agenda. External reporting for the CAP Goal was discontinued in January 2021. Information on this CAP Goal can
be found in the archives on Performance.gov.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
117
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.5: Maximize the availability of the Space Environment Testing
Management Office (SETMO) portfolio of assets to meet NASA's current and
future test facility needs.
Percentage of test availability* of SETMO portfolio of Tier
The Space Environments Testing
1 assets**
Management Office, part of the Mission
Support Directorate, manages NASA's shared
*Test availability = (planned capacity - unplanned down-
capabilities and assets used to conduct testing
time)/planned capacity. Unplanned downtime is total
in a simulated space environments.
downtime, including downtime that impacts a test.
**Tier 1 assets: portfolio of assets for which SETMO
provides annual sustainment funding. Tier 2 assets: port-
folio of assets for which SETMO does not provide annual
sustainment funding.
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Target
90%
90%
90%
90%
Achieved
98%
98.7%
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.2.6 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved this multiyear Performance Goal
by achieving 98.7 percent overall availability of our
SETMO Tier 1 assets, exceeding the FY 2021 target
of 90 percent availability.
NASA's workforce performs essential preventive
maintenance to ensure that key capabilities and
critical assets are available on-time when needed
and will continue to be available in the future to
support the missions that require them. Core capa-
bilities include thermal vacuum chambers, simu-
lators, and the Arc Jet Complex located at NASA's
Ames Research Center in California. NASA imple-
ments strategic investment decisions to sustain,
enhance, replace, modify, or dispose of facilities
based on NASA's and national needs.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
118
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.6: Demolish or eliminate obsolete/unneeded facilities to reduce the
Agency's infrastructure footprint.
The Office of Strategic Infrastructure, part
Square footage or facilities reduced.
of the Mission Support Directorate, strategi-
cally manages NASA's assets and capabilities
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
to meet mission needs and support Agency
Year
operations.
Target
100k sq ft or 20 facilities
51
29
facilities
facilities
Achieved
(68,250
(854k
sq ft)
sq 1 ft)
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.6.1 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved this multiyear Performance Goal by
demolishing 29 facilities or structures, for a total
reduction of 854,000 square feet, exceeding both
targets for FY 2021.
By eliminating inactive and obsolete facilities, we
improve energy efficiency, reduce the Agency's
footprint, eliminate safety and environmental lia-
bilities, and make room for new construction that
fits NASA's current and future needs. Demolishing
these facilities also eliminates the deferred mainte-
nance associated with them and saves operations
and maintenance expenses. During FY 2021, our
demolition program reduced deferred maintenance
by more than $12 million and current replacement
value by approximately $138 million.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
119
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.7: Improve NASA's ability to operate facilities sustainably and reduce
overall resource demands.
Percentage of sustainability goals met annually in the
The Office of Strategic Infrastructure, part of
OMB Scorecard for Efficient Federal Operations/Manage-
the Mission Support Directorate, strategical-
ment.
ly manages NASA's assets and capabilities to
meet mission needs and support Agency oper-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
ations.
Year
Target
>70%
>70%
100%
100$
Achieved
71%
71%
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Yellow
Yellow
Green
Green
Yellow
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.6.2 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this mul-
tiyear Performance Goal by meeting 71 percent
of the sustainability goals, with no Red ratings,
as reported on the FY 2020 OMB Scorecard for
Efficient Federal Operations/Management. Of the
seven sustainability areas assessed by OMB, NASA
received five Green and two Yellow ratings.
Performance in Efficiency Measures / Investment
was Yellow because COVID-19 delayed energy/
water evaluations at four of 12 sites, which caused
the percentage of facilities evaluated over the past
four years to be below the required 90 percent.
Performance in Transportation/Fleet Management
was Yellow because a reporting issue in FY 2019
resulted in underreporting of petroleum fuel use
in covered fleet vehicles. Because personnel were
offsite due to COVID-19, the issue was not discov-
ered on time to correct the error for FY 2019. That
underreporting error caused an artificial year-over-
year increase from FY 2019 to FY 2020. We have
corrected the error.
The Federal Agency Progress Data and OMB
Scorecards site provides data for each sustainability
category and a link to our sustainability report.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
120
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.2.8: Demonstrate increased facility reliability for current and future mis-
sion needs through investments in preventative maintenance that reduce
unscheduled maintenance.
The Office of Strategic Infrastructure, part of
Percentage of maintenance funds* dedicated to un-
the Mission Support Directorate, strategical-
scheduled maintenance.
ly manages NASA's assets and capabilities to
meet mission needs and support Agency oper-
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
ations.
Year
1%
1%
20%
20%
Target
below
below
or
or
23.7%*
21.34%
less
less
Achieved
21.34%
17.37%
Rating
Green
Green
*Includes Office of Strategic Infrastructure funds only.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
None
None
Red
Red
Green
This Performance Goal aligns to 4.6.3 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved this multiyear Performance Goal by
keeping the ratio of unscheduled maintenance to
total maintenance well below the FY 2021 target of
21.34 percent. NASA's achieved a performance of
17.37 percent which is the lowest ratio of unsched-
uled maintenance to total maintenance since the
baseline was set at 31.6 percent in 2015.
NASA performs scheduled maintenance on its
equipment to keep it in good operating condition.
When equipment fails, we must perform unsched-
uled maintenance to repair it. The percentage
of unscheduled maintenance spending to total
maintenance spending is an indicator of the overall
condition of the equipment. More unscheduled
maintenance indicates that the equipment has
become unreliable and unplanned failures and
outages become more frequent, which can delay
mission activities, such as manufacturing and test-
ing. As NASA increases the use of Condition Based
Maintenance, unplanned failures become sched-
uled maintenance as potential failures are detected
before they occur. This has also contributed to an
improvement in this metric.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
121
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.1.1 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Maintain the number of active partner-
ship agreements with domestic, interagency, and international partners that
support and enable NASA's mission.
Number of milestones met.
NASA's Partnership Office and the Office of
International and Interagency Relations
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
(OIIR) engage in non-procurement partner-
ships with international, intergovernmental,
Target
2,404
2,404
academic, industrial, and entrepreneurial
Achieved
2,872
2,752
entities, recognizing them as important con-
Rating
Green
Green
tributors of skill and creativity to NASA mis-
sions. The Mission Support Directorate (MSD)
oversees services provided by the Partnership
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Office.
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved the Performance Goal for partner-
ship agreements in FY 2021. At the end of FY 2021,
NASA had 2,163 domestic and 589 international
active partnership agreements, for a total of 2,752
agreements (exceeding the target of 2,404).
To expand the Agency's strategic partnerships and
meet our mission objectives, we focused on out-
reach efforts to attract new, non-traditional orga-
nizations, while continuing to expand partnerships
with existing partners. NASA personnel across the
Agency conducted numerous outreach meetings
and participated in virtual forums and conferences
identifying and engaging with potential partners.
Due largely to these and other similar outreach ini-
tiatives, NASA entered into partnership agreements
with 107 new (first-time) non-Federal partners.
Reaching new audiences regarding NASA partner-
ship opportunities and increasing the number and
types of new partners benefits the Agency by culti-
vating new and innovative collaboration opportuni-
ties to help advance NASA's missions.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
122
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.1.2 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Procure common goods and services
as an enterprise to eliminate redundancies, increase efficiency, and deliver
more value and savings.
Percentage of NASA's total common spending obligated
NASA's Office of Procurement provides inno-
on Agency, government-wide, or best-in-class (BIC) con-
vative, effective, and efficient acquisition
tracts consistent with NASA's Category Management Plan
solutions, optimizing Agency capabilities and
and the Spend Under Management (SUM) key perfor-
operations and enabling NASA's missions.
mance indicator.
Fiscal Year
2021
2022
SUM = $4.8B (60%)
Target
BIC = $173.7M (5%)
SUM = $5.75B (75.4%)
Achieved
BIC = $150.6M (3.7%)
Rating
Yellow
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA exceeded the FY 2021 SUM target of $4.8 bil-
lion, indicating that NASA's Office of Procurement
is committed to using Government-Wide Category
Management principles (see the Federal guide to
Category Management), eliminating contract redun-
dancies, and using Best-in-Class contract vehicles.
The BIC target has historically been a challenge
due to most BIC contracts not being in key NASA
mission areas. We were slightly below the FY 2021
target of $173.7 million: obligating $150.6 million.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
123
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.5.2 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Improve the security of the NASA oper-
ational technology (OT) systems that are part of NASA Critical Infrastructure
(NCI) in order to ensure they operate safely and securely in the face of the
changing threat environment.
The Enterprise Protection Program is works
Percentage of OT systems that are part of NCI that have
with the Office of the Chief Information
been assessed and granted an Authorization to Operate
Officer and offices across the Agency to ensure
(ATO) in accordance with the Risk Management Frame-
the security of NASA's operational technology.
work (RMF), as outlined in National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) 800-37 and NASA policies and
requirements.
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Target
100%*
100%
Achieved
50%
64.6%
Rating
Green
Green
*Target represents the long-term exemplar for this performance
goal. NASA assesses annual progress based on an interim tar-
get.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
None before FY 2019
Green
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA exceeded the incremental progress expected
in FY 2021 toward the multi-year Performance
Goal target of 100 percent operational technol-
ogy systems receiving an ATO. We made progress
on improving the security and resiliency of the
Agency's operational technology systems and are
on track to achieve the target for this multi-year
Performance Goal to ensure safe and secure opera-
tion of NCI.
By the end of FY 2021, the Agency identified all
operational technology systems that are part of NCI
and validated that 64.6 percent of operational tech-
nology systems that are part of NCI were assessed
and granted an ATO in accordance with Risk
Management Framework as outlined in NIST 800-
37 and NASA policies and requirements. This result
exceeded our target of meeting at least 50 percent
in FY 2021. The Agency continued implementing
policy revisions to include requirements related to
operational technology security.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
124
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
Strategic Objective 4.3
Build the next generation of explorers.
LEAD OFFICES
Office of Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) Engagement (OSTEM)
NASA makes vital investments toward building a
GOAL LEADER
diverse STEM workforce. The scope of our STEM
Kris Brown, Deputy Associate Administrator for Strategy
engagement comprises all endeavors to attract,
and Integration, OSTEM
engage, and educate students and to support
educators and educational institutions. Given the
Budget
Nation's need for a skilled STEM workforce and
FY
$M
projected demand, NASA clearly has a vested
interest in attracting, engaging, and preparing its
Op Plan
2021
$135.5
future STEM professionals. The national STEM
Requested
2022
$155.7
ecosystem will benefit from NASA contributions
to attract and retain students on STEM pathways,
Requested
2023
$158.9
with increased attention on underserved and
2024
$162.1
underrepresented students. Recent national and
international tests show that in the last decade,
2025
$165.3
Outyear
U.S. students have demonstrated little or no
2026
$168.6
growth in mathematics and remain ranked in the
2027
$172.0
Below:NASA astronaut Victor Glover speaks with students from Cardozo Educational Campus, Friendship Technology Preparatory High School, McKinley
Technical High School, Phelps High School, and Wilson High School about his time aboard the International Space Station, November 18, 2021, at Ben's
Chili Bowl in Washington, DC. Image Credit: NASA/Joel Kowsky
ALI
SS
-
CHIL
ADVANCE
-
Strategic Goal 4
middle of advanced economies on international
science and mathematics assessments¹.
NASA will implement strategies to broaden stu-
dent participation to increase diversity, equity,
inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) in STEM through
NASA opportunities and activities. While the num-
ber of women and underrepresented minorities
earning STEM degrees has grown in broad science
and engineering occupations over the last decade,
significant underrepresentation remains in areas
critical to NASA like engineering and computer
and mathematical sciences². NASA is committed to
building a diverse, skilled future STEM workforce-
our next generation of explorers with the technical
skills needed to carry forward our Nation's vital
mission and work in aeronautics and space into the
future.
Below: SpaceX Crew-1 NASA astronauts, from left, Shannon Walker, Mike Hopkins, and Victor Glover read a book to students from the Learn
DC
public
charter school at Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling (JBAB), November 19, 2021, in Washington, DC. Image Credit: NASA/Aubrey Gemignani
1 Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2020. Science and Engineering Indicators 2020: The State of U.S Science and Engi-
neering. NSB-2020-1. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20201/
2 National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2019. Women, Minorities, and Persons with
Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 2019. Special Report NSF 19-304.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
126
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.3.1: Create unique opportunities for a diverse set of students to contribute
to NASA's work in exploration and discovery.
Number of paper presentations and peer-reviewed
research publications resulting from higher education
NASA STEM Engagement encompasses all
students' engagement in STEM engagement investments.
endeavors Agency-wide to attract, engage and
educate K-12 and higher education students
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
and to support educators, educational institu-
Year
tions and professional organizations in STEM
Target
1,800
1,800
fields.
Achieved
Rating
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
127
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.3.2: Build a diverse future STEM workforce by engaging students in authen-
tic learning experiences with NASA's people, content, and facilities.
Percentage of higher education significant awards in four
categories of student diversity for NASA STEM enrollees
NASA STEM Engagement encompasses all
compared to the national average.
endeavors Agency-wide to attract, engage and
educate K-12 and higher education students
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
and to support educators, educational institu-
Year
tions and professional organizations in STEM
Baseline is
Meet or
fields.
measured for 4
exceed targets
Target
categories
for 2 of the 4
categories
Baseline is
and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving
Achieved
measured for 4
Institutions, Alaskan Native-Serving and Native
categories
Hawaiian-Serving Institutions, Historically Black
Rating
Green
Green
Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-Serving
**Higher education significant awards are made through the
Institutions, Native American-Serving Nontribal
National Space Grant College and Fellowship Project, Minori-
Institutions, Predominantly Black Institutions,
ty University Research and Education Project, Internship and
Predominantly White Institutions, and Tribal
Fellowship programs, and Mission Directorates (funded intern-
Colleges and Universities) and levels (at least two
ships). Note: NASA rates progress on this performance goal with
but less than four years, and four or more years),
the use of data reported on the academic calendar. Thus, the
as defined by the U.S. Department of Education.
FY 2021 rating is based on data from the 2019-2020 academic
calendar.
Looking forward, NASA will continue to assess
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
annual progress against national averages obtained
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
from the U.S. Department of Education's National
Center for Education Statistics. However, we will
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.3.3 under
evaluate year-to-year progress based on actual
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
results starting from this baseline.
3.3.3 [Completed at end of FY 2021]: Provide
opportunities for students, especially those under-
represented in STEM fields, to engage with NASA's
aeronautics, space, and science people, content,
and facilities in support of a diverse future NASA
and aerospace industry workforce.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA met the target for Performance Goal 3.3.3.
NASA set the following four baseline percentages
for higher education significant awardees who
self-identified belonging to an underrepresented
category: 1) 17.3% race; 2) 16.9% ethnicity; 41.6%
gender; 1.4% disability. The percentages were
based on analysis of performance data on higher
education awards (including internships, fellow-
ships, and sustained engineering design challenge
opportunities) NASA provided for the 2019-2020
academic year to students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM.
NASA established baseline percentages of higher
education significant awards to students across
all institution categories (e.g., Asian American
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
128
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.3.3: Attract diverse groups of students to STEM through learning oppor-
tunities that spark interest and provide connections to NASA's mission and
work.
NASA STEM Engagement encompasses all
Complete milestone(s) to develop, pilot, and assess
endeavors Agency-wide to attract, engage and
strategies and/or systems to improve access, navigability,
educate K-12 and higher education students
and usability of NASA STEM Engagement products and
and to support educators, educational institu-
learning opportunities aimed at attracting diverse groups
of students to STEM.
tions and professional organizations in STEM
fields.
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Target
1
1
Achieved
Rating
Milestones for FY 2022
1. Develop and pilot strategies and/or systems to
improve access, navigability, and usability of
NASA STEM Engagement K-12 products and learn-
ing opportunities (including the Office of STEM
Engagement's Next Gen STEM project and Mission
Directorate K-12 activities) aimed at attracting
diverse groups of students to STEM.
Milestones for FY 2023
1.
Increase utilization of select NASA STEM Engagement
products and/or learning opportunities (including
the Office of STEM Engagement's Next Gen STEM
project and Mission Directorate K-12 activities) by
10%.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
129
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
4.3.4: Promote equal opportunity compliance and encourage best practices
among NASA grant recipient institutions to ensure that grantees are provid-
ing equal opportunity regardless of race, color, national origin, sex (including
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity), age, or disability.
Percentage of NASA civil rights recommendations or cor-
rective actions that have been implemented within 1 year
The Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity
by the grant recipient institution.*
leads diversity and civil rights policies, pro-
grams, and services, enabling the universe of
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
available talent to contribute inclusively and
Year
equitably to NASA.
Target
90%
90%
100%
100%
Achieved
90%
100%
Rating
Green
Green
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Green
Green
Green
Green
*NASA reviews 2-3 grant recipient institutions annually (through
on-site and desk audits), issuing recommendations and/or correc-
tive actions where needed, to ensure compliance with equal op-
portunity laws and mandates.
This Performance Goal aligns to 3.3.2 under
the 2018 Strategic Plan.
3.3.2: Promote equal opportunity and encourage
best practices among NASA grant recipient institu-
tions.
FY 2021 Performance Progress
NASA achieved the FY 2021 target for this
Performance Goal. We determined that 100 percent
of the three funding recipients for which compli-
ance monitoring was completed in FY 2021 (Science
Museum of Minnesota, University of Nebraska at
Omaha, and Virginia Air and Space Center) were
compliant with our equal opportunity recommen-
dations and corrective actions.
During FY 2021, NASA also initiated compliance
monitoring on a fourth funding recipient, Louisiana
State University (LSU). While compliance monitoring
of LSU continues into FY 2022, LSU implemented all
of the corrective actions during FY 2021.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
130
ADVANCE
Strategic Goal 4
3.3.1 [Complete at end of FY 2021]: Increase NASA's public engagement
through social media.
Percentage of annual social media audience growth as
measured by the number of total followers across all
The Office of Communications serves as the
flagship platforms. This metric is tracked on a recurring
corporate, Agency-wide communications func-
basis month-over-month.
tion for NASA, providing a wide practicable
and appropriate dissemination of information
Fiscal
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
to news and media organizations and the pub-
Year
lic concerning the objectives, methods, and
Target
10%
10%
results of NASA programs. OCOMM connects
Achieved
19.5%
14.5%
people to NASA's missions and accomplish-
Rating
Green
Green
ments as we explore the unknown, enable
technologies for improving life on Earth, and
inspire the world.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Green
Yellow
Green
Green
Green
(MAP). Under this program, the Agency has aligned
communications governance and resources to
FY 2021 Performance Progress
enable the communications enterprise to operate
more efficiently and sustainably. The newly estab-
NASA's flagship social media platforms grew by
lished communications enterprise management
19.5 percent during FY 2021, exceeding the annual
office is instituting business process improvements
target of 10 percent for this Performance Goal.
that will better enable the enterprise to keep the
NASA continues to integrate metrics and use data
public informed about NASA's activities.
to inform decisions on better reaching the public,
engaging stakeholders, and evaluate outcomes.
We also continue to use data to refine content and
social media distribution platforms, targeted to
audience preferences.
In FY 2021, large, popular events and major activ-
ities, including the OSIRIS-REx Touch-and-Go
event, NASA's SpaceX Crew-1 launch and splash-
down, Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich Satellite Launch,
Green Run Hot Fire Test 1 and 2 (Artemis), Mars
2020 Perseverance Landing, Mars Ingenuity First
Flight, Earth Day 2021 and Crew-2 Launch, drove
an increase in followers of Agency flagship digital
accounts.
50
49.6
48.6
in
Current growth numbers on flagship social
45
accounts:
40
40.8
Facebook: +3%
35
35.8
33.6
Twitter: +19%
30
29.9
Tumblr: +5%
27.6
25
24.9
25.6
f
21.7
Instagram: +15%
20,6
21.1
20
16.1
Linkedln: +13%
16.4
15
12.8
15.7
12.8
11.9
YouTube: +24%
10
7.6
9.3
7.5
7.5
5
5.3
5.5
4.6
In FY 2021, NASA also completed the design of an
4.9
1.7
2.6
1.4
0.9
o
0.4
0.6
0.9
0.9
integrated Agency communications team through
FY 2014 FY 2015 FY 2016 FY 2017 FY 2018 FY 2019 FY 2020 FY 2021
the Mission Support Future Architecture Program
-Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
Tumbir
LinkedIn
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
131
L
Teams
at
NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida are working to ensure the crawlerway, the path the crawler-transporter 2 (CT-2), mobile launcher, and
Space Launch System rocket with Orion atop will take from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39B, is strong enough to withstand the
weight
of, and provide stability for, Artemis I. In this view, taken on January 22, 2021, CT-2 carries the mobile launcher platform 1 that was used during the Shuttle
program. It was driven back and forth on the crawlerway with several cement blocks, each weighing about 40,000 pounds, to strengthen the crawlerway
for
launch. Artemis I will be the first in a series of increasingly complex missions to the Moon. Under the Artemis program, NASA aims to land the first woman
and the first person of color on the Moon and establish sustainable lunar exploration by the end of the decade. Image credit: NASA/Kim Shiflett
Appendixes
Appendix A: FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
Appendix B: FY 2021 Summary of Progress
by Strategic Objective
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
Appendix A: FY 2023
Annual Evaluation Plan
NASA's FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act) Title I reinforces and supports
Federal evidence-building activities, the Open, Public, Electronic, and Necessary (OPEN) Government Data
Act, and the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA). The Evidence Act Title
I requires Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Act agencies to publish an Annual Evaluation Plan (AEP) that conveys
significant evaluations across the Agency each fiscal year, developed in coordination with the Agency Perfor-
mance Plan. The AEP establishes and informs NASA's key stakeholders about planned evaluations. Evalua-
tions will uncover findings that will inform NASA program budgets, the Strategic Plan and Learning Agenda,
annual Strategic Review, ongoing program management and development, and integrate evidence into the
performance planning process.
Evaluation Culture
Evaluation Standards
NASA relies on a culture of evidence-based, data-driven research designs and methodologies to evaluate
its programs, policies, and organizations across the Agency. Evaluation, as defined by the Evidence Act, is
an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of one or more programs, policies, or organi-
zations intended to assess their effectiveness and efficiency. The AEP details only those NASA evaluations
that meet the Agency's definition of "significant" evaluations (see Figure 1 below). Led by NASA's Evaluation
Officer, in conjunction with the Statistical Officer and Chief Data Officer, five standards guide NASA's evalua-
tion culture: rigor, relevance and utility, independence and objectivity, transparency, and ethics. These stan-
dards, in addition to the criteria established for "significant" evaluations are the foundation that NASA uses
to support its array of evaluation activities.
Above: NASA astronaut Stephanie Wilson poses for a portrait, September 16, 2020, in the Blue Flight Control Room at NASA's Johnson Space Center in
Houston, Texas. Image Credit: NASA/Bill Ingalls
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
133
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
Purpose
The AEP identifies planned "significant" evaluations from across the Agency. It serves as a means to inform
Agency senior officials and the public where the most significant evaluations are conducted, cultivate data
sharing and resources between NASA organizations, and provide information to help support the Agency's
evidence-driven culture.
Dissemination and Sharing
NASA has long been committed to disseminating and sharing results from its evidence-building activities
with the greater scientific community and, when permissible, making this information broadly available to
the public. As detailed in NASA Procedural Requirement (NPR) 2200.2D - Requirements for Documentation,
Approval and Dissemination of Scientific and Technical Information, the Agency strives for the widest prac-
ticable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning its activities and scientific and technical
information. NASA will leverage this framework in sharing findings from its "significant" evaluations.
The Agency's dissemination framework includes an array of symposium presentations, peer reviewed
journal publications, and NASA internal and external council discussions. Agency evaluations that provide
promising and effective findings are systematically and broadly disseminated to potential beneficiaries and
to Federal agency partners. Criteria and requirements for the dissemination of symposia lectures and pa-
pers, in addition to journal materials beyond the Agency, are detailed in Chapter 5 of NPR 2200.2D to ensure
proper review of substantive content, technical accuracy, overall quality, and value to the larger scientific
community. The Evaluation Officer, as well as Mission Directorate Associate Administrators and Center Di-
rectors, have responsibility for the technical, scientific, and programmatic accuracy of information released
externally from the Agency by their respective programs.
While NASA maintains a free exchange of scientific and technological information among scientists and engi-
neers, between NASA staff and the scientific community, and between NASA employees and the public, the
AEP is a formal dissemination of "significant" evaluations. Table 1, below, depicts broad evaluation dissemi-
nation methods by stakeholder groups and the formats used to share significant evaluations.
Table 1. Dissemination and Sharing Summary
Stakeholder Group
Dissemination Channel
NASA Senior Officials
Council meetings, Conferences, Reports
Centers and Mission Directorates Leadership
Conferences, Webinars, Performance Reviews
Internal Councils and Symposia
Reports, Briefings, Conferences
External Councils, NASA Advisory Council (NAC)
Conferences, Webinars
Congress
Committee hearings, Briefings
Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Budget Submission and Reviews, Council Meetings
Public, National Academies
Press releases, Webinars, NAC meetings, Conferences
NASA's Criteria for Defining "Significant" Evaluations
NASA has an extensive evidence culture that leverages the findings from the numerous evaluations per-
formed across the Agency to make evidence-based decisions that support NASA's mission, foster a culture
of evaluation, and promote better value for the public. While the Agency considers every evaluation import-
ant, some rise to the level to influence policy and program decisions. To determine these "significant" evalu-
ations, NASA has formulated criteria in accordance with the Evidence Act. These criteria identify NASA's most
"significant" evaluations and include those that fit one or more of the criteria illustrated in Figure 1.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
134
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
Figure 1. Criteria for NASA's Significant Evaluations
Learning Agenda
Accountability
Related to a Priority Question from
Addresses concerns from OIG and
NASA's Learning Agenda
GAO via official reports (i.e., OIG
Management Challenges Letter,
GAO Priority Recommendation
Letter, GAO High Risk List)
Significant
Criteria
Agency Priority
Legislative Priority
Directed by NASA leadership or the
Mandated by Congress
Executive Branch (via Space Policy
Directives or mandates) to improve
the ability of the Agency to
conduct its programs and mission
FY 2023 Significant Evaluations
Technology Investment
NASA invests in innovative early stage technology concepts that could lead to future breakthrough capabil-
ities and enable new paradigms or new mission types in the longer-term. NASA is evaluating its strategy for
investments in early stage innovation that help enable these potential breakthroughs of tomorrow. Diversity
is a key aspect of an early stage investment and partnership strategy. Enabling technology breakthroughs
of the future requires NASA to look to diverse sources for ideas and innovation. Companies-small and
large, academia, research institutions, students, individual inventors and hobbyists, NASA researchers and
others can all provide rich inputs to a thriving innovation ecosystem.
NASA's STMD early stage programs have encouraged participation from underserved and underrepre-
sented communities-including women and women-owned businesses; socially and economically disad-
vantaged individuals, businesses, and research institutions; and entrepreneurs living in or whose busi-
nesses are located and operate in states with a lower number of awards-in technology development
activities through outreach activities. For example, the Small Business Innovative Research/Small Business
Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR), NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts (NIAC), and the Space Technology Re-
search Grants (STRG) programs have increased their outreach and communications to underserved and un-
derrepresented communities, including Historically Black College and Universities (HBCU) and Minority
Serving Institutions (MSI). The SBIR/STTR programs have supported 15 Technology Infusion Road tours
which have attracted over 1,200 participants and have resulted in some increased participation in STTR
proposals. From 2010-2020, approximately 10% of SBIR/STTR Phase I awards have been to minority owned
firms. Additionally, NIAC has seen an increase in female grant awardees from 5.6% in 2013 to 12% in recent
years. STRG's largest awards - the four Space Technology Research Institutes (STRIs) - all feature MSI partic-
ipation. One STRI is now led by an MSI university, which recently achieved MSI status, post award. Despite
these improvements, NASA believes that more MSIs and HBCUs could be engaged and contributing to space
technology research and innovation.
Outreach alone does not sufficiently address the underlying factors that create challenges for underserved
and underrepresented community participation, thus limiting NASA's community of innovation. Efforts
to understand the core capabilities that exist at HBCUs and MSIs and to identify synergies between those
capabilities and NASA core competencies will help NASA develop a more effective platform of informa-
tion sharing and relationship building with HBCUs/MSIs. Additionally, working with a third party deeply
familiar with the challenges HBCUs and MSIs face in securing government research funding and identifying
small business partners will enable NASA to evaluate relevant factors related to its goals. Through these ef-
forts, NASA seeks to develop a more diverse pipeline of innovative solutions and increase HBCU/MSI access
to funding and small business partners.
Accordingly, over the last couple years, NASA has begun piloting new approaches to engagement
with HBCUs and MSI. In August 2020, through the Minority University Research and Education Proj-
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
135
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
ect (MUREP) Space Technology Artemis Research (M-STAR) initiative, NASA awarded $604,000 to 15 HBCUs
and MSIs to strengthen and develop research capacity in areas of strategic importance to NASA STMD. In
August 2021, NASA then awarded 11, $50,000 planning grants through the MUREP-STTR (M-STTR) initiative
specifically to foster partnerships between MSIs and small businesses and prepare them to submit technol-
ogy proposals to NASA's annual STTR Phase I solicitation. Also during 2021, SBIR/STTR entered a five-year
cooperative agreement with the MSI STEM Research and Development Consortium (MSRDC) to leverage
their work in connecting HBCUs and MSIs with research and development sponsors, and to gain additional
insights into specific factors that may influence HBCU and MSI participation in NASA SBIR/STTR.
During FY 2022, NASA anticipates that we will have evaluated the results of the aforementioned MUREP ini-
tiatives, with particular focus on M-STTR grantee participation and success in the STTR Phase I solicitation
process. Also, during FY 2022, we anticipate that our partnership with MSRDC will have resulted in a forma-
tive evaluation, identifying an array of factors that potentially serve as challenges or barriers to entry for
HBCU and MSI participation in NASA SBIR/STTR. The results of our FY 2022 evaluation activities will directly
inform our FY 2023 evaluation.
Building on our FY 2022 results, NASA will select specific factor(s) that show significant potential to expand
NASA's early stage innovation community through increased HBCU and MSI contribution. We will then
design and implement at least one targeted impact evaluation in FY 2023 to test the impact of NASA inter-
vention related to the identified factor(s). NASA plans to work closely with both the GSA Office of Evaluation
Services (OES) and MSRDC to develop the experimental design and conduct the evaluation.
Theory of Change
If NASA can better understand the core capabilities that exist at HBCUs and MSIs, identify synergies between
those capabilities and NASA core competencies, and directly address specific factors that serve as potential
barriers to entry, then NASA will see increased HBCU and MSI participation in early stage innovation pro-
grams, which will ultimately lead to an expanded, more diverse innovation community and result in more
novel ideas to seed tomorrow's space technology breakthroughs.
Data and Information
This evaluation will undertake active data collection through MSRDC, who will work directly with
HBCUs and MSIs as well as from customer experience surveys. In addition, existing data from the program's
proposal processes, including M-STTR results, will be analyzed.
Source
Purpose
MSRDC data
Understand present trends from HBCUs and MSIs.
Collect data from past awardees through annual STTR proposal processes that will supplement
Existing data
active data gathering to analyze and determine trends. Analyze results of the M-STTR initiative.
Section 280 customer
Learn more about what made past awardees successful and what part of their customer
experience clearance
experience with the STTR program may have discouraged participation or success, if any.
Methods to be used and Evaluation Design
NASA will undertake an experimental design process evaluation to understand strategies to increase HBCU
and MSI contributions. This will be a mixed-method evaluation. Qualitative and quantitative approaches
will be used in the implementation study. This evaluation design will be refined through a partnership with
GSA's Office of Evaluation Science (OES) in FY 2022.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
136
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
Capture quantitative and qualitative data for research institution capabilities through an MSRDC.
Quantitative data example: number of HBCUs/MSIs that submit capabilities and/or number that have tech-
nology areas where there is a great deal of synergy, some synergy, or little to no synergy with NASA core
competency areas.
Qualitative data example: Awareness of the existence of the capabilities submission database and under-
Inputs
standing its benefits.
Capture and analyze STTR past participation data.
Consider insights from NASAs MUREP.
Consider surveys past successful STTR awardees through our Section 280 customer experience clear-
ance to see which parts of their experience with the program most contributed to successful partnering
between RIs and small businesses.
Identify the factor(s) within NASA's span of control (outreach, networking, funding, technical and business
assistance, etc.) that are most relevant when considering partnerships between HBCUs/MSIs and small
businesses and any negative impacts.
Processes
Analyze what synergies can be made to inform which mechanism might best support engagement and ways
to experiment with incentives that encourage engagement.
Conduct pilot/experiment to test NASA's ability to address identified factor(s) in HBCU/MSI participation.
Expected
Inform and update the policy to increase the number of HBCUs and MSIs that are awarded STTRs to bring
Outputs
diverse ideas to NASAs missions and expand NASA's economic impact in underrepresented communities.
Challenges
Since the HBCU/MSI community is small, getting enough participants will rely on active marketing through
a well-connected community intermediary. The ability to get qualitative data about past successful STTR
awardee partnership characteristics will be limited by the size of the pool and their willingness to provide
information. NASA seeks to leverage MSRDC's long standing relationships with the HBCU/MSI community to
communicate results and provide study data.
Dissemination Strategies
The results will be shared broadly within NASA to all programs concerned with increasing the participation
of underserved and underrepresented communities, with the caveat that this evaluation will focus on the
intersection of successful small business and research institution partnerships-a core part of lab-to-mar-
ket efforts. These results could inform experiments as programmatic strategies to be considered by other
programs that engage the small business, entrepreneur or research community within other early stage
programs, the Office of STEM Engagement (OSTEM), and the Office of Small Business Programs (OSBP). Eval-
uation results would benefit other agencies' SBIR/STTR programs and the Small Business Administration on
ways to increase participation.
Timeframe
The evaluation design will be finalized in FY 2022, and evaluation will occur by the end of FY 2023.
Industrial Base
NASA and the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), National Oceanic and At-
mospheric Administration (NOAA), National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS),
will conduct an evaluation of the factors that drive efficiency in the NASA and United States civil space sup-
ply chain network.
This multi-year collaboration will build upon a substantial record of space sector analysis conducted be-
tween BIS, NASA and the broader U.S. Government (USG) to identify traits that benefit or impede the cur-
rent health and competitiveness of the civil segment of the U.S. Space Industrial Base (SIB). Early findings
will also inform the planning and execution of the civil space provisions of the 2020 National Space Policy
(NSP). NASA and DOC (NOAA) seek visibility into the current and prospective performance of the civil space
community to achieve enhanced situational awareness in times of uncertainty. Furthermore, survey re-
sponses from firms in the sector are expected help illuminate the impacts of COVID-19, M&A, disruptive
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
137
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
technology, changing workforce dynamics and other supply chain issues.
Theory of Change
If NASA can better understand the industrial base ecosystem in the civil space sector, then NASA may be
able to better forecast pressures, anticipate risks, and mitigate against forces that obstruct the aerospace
supply chain to drive adaptability and enhance decision making.
Evaluation Question(s)
What are the underlying factors and to what extent do these factors affect the aerospace industrial base to sup-
port Federal civil space acquisition and development?
NASA will evaluate this question through a survey and analysis that looks at the supply chain and underlying
factors related to the aerospace industrial base. This evaluation seeks to address impacts to the aerospace
supply chain through the following factors:
Impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic;
Corporate financial distress;
Mergers and acquisitions;
Costs related to foreign sourcing, offshoring of critical supply chain components,
and alternatively, reshoring;
Disruptive new technologies, including advances in artificial intelligence,
quantum computing, and additive manufacturing;
Changing workforce dynamics including emphasis on STEM practices;
Cybersecurity investments and cybercrime impacts; and
Constraints related to U.S. Federal acquisition reforms.
Data and Information
The survey instrument is currently in work and has not been finalized. Preliminary sources of data are outlined
below.
Source
Purpose
Accurate responses from the firms regarding corporate operations, structure, financials, and tech
Survey responses
development.
Publicly Available
Some publicly-traded firms file annual reports and 10-K filings, providing additional insight into the
Information
corporation.
Methods to be used and Evaluation Design
NASA will undertake a non-experimental formative evaluation design to analyze survey results, including a
time series analysis of responses over the course of three observation years:
FY 2021: Survey development, testing, distribution, and organization of mailing list and portal
hosted by the Census Bureau;
FY 2022: Survey analysis of roughly 500 completed survey responses in Wave 1 compiled,
analyzed, briefed and shared;
FY 2023: Survey analysis and comparison of roughly 500 - 1,000 completed survey responses
in Wave 2 compiled, analyzed, briefed, and shared.
Further evaluation design details are under discussion, with several options, techniques, and tools under
consideration. Final determination is expected to be made by the end of the calendar year 2021.
Challenges
Anticipated challenges include willingness of survey respondents to provide detailed current and historical
information regarding performance, financials, and supply chain issues. Additional challenges include ability
of analysts to evaluate large datasets and assess impacts to NASA and other space agencies.
Dissemination Strategies
A final dissemination plan has not yet been approved. Initial considerations suggest a wide dissemination
within NASA to all impacted programs, the broader U.S. civil space community, including primary space
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
138
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
agencies and associated partners. In addition, a summary of findings is likely to be disseminated to relevant
stakeholders including the Administration, Congress, industry, academia, and the public.
Timeframe
The timeframe for this evaluation is FY 2021-FY 2023.
Internship Outcomes
The purpose of the Internship Outcome Assessment Year 2 Study is to measure students' immediate out-
comes of participating in a NASA internship and assess how and to what extent interns are contributing to
NASA's missions. Additionally, this study will identify sources of group differences and address how NASA
can continue to broaden participation of students from historically underrepresented groups in STEM fields.
This study will build upon the Year 1 findings, expanding the scope of the pre-post assessment and com-
paring Year 1 findings to Year 2 findings. The results of this study are intended to be used for programmatic
improvement.
Theory of Change
If NASA increases the number of interns from underrepresented and underserved communities who apply
to and are accepted for a NASA internship, there will be an increase in contributions to NASA's work from
diverse viewpoints and lead to full time employment that will strengthen the potential for a more diverse
future workforce.
Evaluation Question(s)
The following evaluation questions may guide the approach and design of this outcome assessment:
1. To what extent is participation in NASA internships associated with
a. intern satisfaction with the program?
b. interns' self-reported gains in science and research-related outcomes?
C. interns' likelihood to pursue future STEM-related activities, education, and careers?
2. Are there any differences in interns' reports based upon underrepresented group status?
3. What insight do mentors provide on the intern program?
4. How do mentors characterize interns' contributions to NASA's missions?
5. Do interns demonstrate growth toward mastery of 21st Century Skills across
the duration of the internship as assessed by their mentor?
Data and Information
Source
Purpose
The Intern Survey is a questionnaire adapted from the Department of Defense (DOD) Army
Educational Outreach Program (AEOP). We modified the survey to fit the contextual circumstances,
vision, goals, and objectives of NASA's internship program. The questionnaire addresses the follow-
ing areas of interest:
Intern Survey
1. Satisfaction with the internship program resources and features.
2. Experiences with promising teaching and mentoring practices.
3. Gains in science and research-related outcomes.
4. Likelihood to pursue future STEM-related activities, education, and careers.
The Mentor Survey is a questionnaire adapted from the Department of Defense (DOD) Army
Educational Outreach Program (AEOP). We modified the survey to fit the contextual circumstances,
vision, goals, and objectives of NASA's internship program. The questionnaire addresses the follow-
Mentor Survey
ing areas of interest:
1. Satisfaction with the internship program resources and features.
2. Use of promising teaching and mentoring practices.
3. Perceived intern gains in science and research-related outcomes.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
139
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
The 21st Century Skills Assessment is an objective assessment measure that is completed by each
interns' mentor regarding their progress toward mastery of important 21st Century skills (Sondergeld
& Johnson, 2016). Mentors assess each intern in a pre/post manner. The first assessment will be
completed in the first days of the program (pre). The second assessment will be completed at the
end of the program (post). The assessment is used to determine the growth toward mastery for
each participant during their time in the internship. Mentors rate each participants' skills in six do-
21st Century Skills
mains of 21st Century skills:
Assessment
1. Creativity and Innovation
2. Critical Thinking and Problem Solving
3. Communication, Collaboration, Social, and Cross-Cultural Skills
4. Information, Media, & Technological Literacy
5. Flexibility, Adaptability, Initiative, and Self-Direction
6. Productivity, Accountability, Leadership, and Responsibility
Methods to be used and Evaluation Design
This study will use both quantitative and qualitative methods to analyze survey data. Quantitative data will
be summarized using descriptive statistics such as numbers of respondents, frequencies and proportions
of responses, average response when responses categories are assigned to a Likert scale (e.g., 1 = "Never
Used" to 4 = "Used Every day"), and standard deviations. Emergent coding will be used for the qualitative
data to identify the most common themes in responses.
Inferential statistics will be used to identify sources of group differences and in support of NASA's goal to
broaden participation of historically underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Statistical significance will be
determined with t-tests, chi-square tests, or various non-parametric tests as appropriate, with significance
defined at p < 0.05. Because statistical significance is sensitive to the number of respondents, it is more diffi-
cult to detect significant changes with small numbers of respondents. Therefore, practical significance, also
known as effect size, will be reported when differences are statistically significant.
21st Century Skills Assessment data will be analyzed using 2-Between, 2-Within Repeated-Measures ANOVAs
to examine potential differences from pre- to post-observation by underrepresented group status and set-
ting. Descriptive and inferential statistics will be included.
Inputs
Participation in NASA Internship Program
Engagement in authentic research experience
Processes
Exposure to evidence-based teaching and mentor practices
Gains in science and research-related outcomes
Expected outputs
Gains in 21st Century Skills
Challenges
We strive to execute a utilization-focused evaluation that provides data that is useful for continual program-
matic improvement and evidence-based decision-making. Thus, we anticipate challenges related to the
practical trade-offs that must be considered in less than ideal, or "real world" contexts. The table below iden-
tifies three common evaluation challenges for utilization-focused evaluation and corresponding pragmatic
principles that are relevant to this study (Patton, 2015).
Table 1. Challenges of utilization-focused evaluation (Excerpt from Patton, 2015, p. 156)
Evaluation Challenge
Pragmatic Principle
1. Providing the best possible data
Providing less than perfect data that is available on time to affect decision is better
in time to affect decisions.
than using more perfect data that is available after decisions have been taken.
2. Providing methodologically rigor-
The meaning of "rigor" depends on context. Rigor includes not just validity and
ous data on important questions.
accuracy but whether the findings are actionable and useful.
3. Providing comprehensive
Timeliness trumps comprehensiveness. Less is more when the evaluation can cut
findings.
to the chase and focus on what is most useful.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
140
APPENDIX A
FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan
Additionally, to ensure a high-quality evaluation is conducted, we have used the program evaluation stan-
dards for evaluator credibility (U1 Evaluator Credibility) and conflicts of interest (P6 Conflicts of Interest) to
assess the evaluator's potential bias. To address evaluator credibility, the independent contractor conduct-
ing the evaluation, has selected highly qualified, experienced program evaluators to design and conduct this
study. The individuals selected to design and conduct this evaluation are independent from the policies, de-
cision-making, operations, and/or implementation of the activities which are the subject of this investigation.
Table 2 lists the primary risks associated with the study and the management strategies that will be used to
minimize these risks.
Table 2. Risk mitigation strategy
Potential Issues & Risks
Management Strategies
A schedule of tasks and milestones will be created for the study. The schedule will be closely
1. Schedule Slippage
monitored by the evaluator and NASA. Any potential schedule slippage will be addressed.
This study will meet the Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation (JCSEE,
2011) Program Evaluation Standard U1: Evaluator Credibility - evaluations should be conduct-
2. Evaluator or
ed by qualified people who establish and maintain credibility in evaluation context.
The Evaluators/Researchers are Ph.D.-credentialed staff with expertise in higher education
Researcher Credibility
STEM teaching and learning, education program evaluation, and education research.
The data collected during this investigation, data analysis, and findings will be reviewed by
two experienced program evaluators.
This study will meet the Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation (JCSEE,
2011) Program Evaluation Standard P6: evaluations should openly and honestly identify and
address real or perceived conflicts of interests that may compromise the evaluation.
3. Conflicts of
Potential conflicts of interest between the evaluator's (i.e. independent contractor) implemen-
tation and evaluation of NASA's STEM Engagement higher education activities will be openly
Interest
discussed with NASA.
Any perceived or real conflicts of interest will be minimized by the independence of the
individuals conducting the evaluation from the policies, decision-making, operations, and/or
implementation of the activities which are the subject of this investigation.
Dissemination Strategies
The findings of this study will be summarized in an evaluation report. The report will be shared broadly
among the NASA STEM Engagement community. The findings will also be presented at the OSTEM Perfor-
mance and Evaluation Community of Practice, STEM Engagement Council meetings, and to the NASA Adviso-
ry Council.
Timeframe
This study will take place in FY 2022-FY 2023.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
141
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Appendix B:
FY 2021 Summary of Progress
On June 22, 2021, NASA held the last Strategic Review focused on the 13 Strategic Objectives aligned to our
2018 Strategic Plan. The table below shows the results-Noteworthy Progress, Satisfactory Performance, or
were a Focus Area for Improvement for 2018 through 2021. In April 2022, NASA will begin the first Strategic
Review for the Strategic Objectives described in the 2022 Strategic Plan.
2018 Strategic Objective
2018
2019
2020
2021
1.1: Understand the Sun, Earth, Solar System and Universe
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
1.2: Understand Responses of Physical and Biological Systems to
Spaceflight
Noteworthy
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
2.1: Lay the Foundation for America to Maintain a Constant Human
Presence in Low Earth Orbit
Noteworthy
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
2.2: Conduct Exploration in Deep Space, Including to the Surface of
the Moon
Satisfactory
Focus Area
Focus Area
Satisfactory
3.1 Develop and Transfer Revolutionary Technologies to Enable
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Exploration Capabilities for NASA and the Nation
3.2: Transform Aviation Through Revolutionary Technology
Research Development, and Transfer
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
3.3: Inspire and Engage the Public in Aeronautics, Space and
Science
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Above: NASA Administrator Bill Nelson talks to the Agency's workforce during his first State of NASA event on June 2, 2021, at NASA Headquarters Mary
W. Jackson Building in Washington. Nelson remarked on his long history with NASA, and among other topics, discussed the Agency's plans for future Earth-
focused missions to address climate change and a robotic and human return to the Moon through the Artemis program, as well as announcing two new
planetary science missions to Venus, VERITAS and DAVINCI+. Image Credit: NASA/Bill Ingalls
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
142
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
4.1: Engage in Partnership Strategies
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
4.2: Enable Space Access and Services
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Noteworthy
4.3: Assure Safety and Mission Success
Satisfactory
Focus Area
Satisfactory
Focus Area
4.4: Manage Human Capital
Satisfactory
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
4.5: Ensure Enterprise Protection
Focus Area
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
4.6: Sustain Infrastructure Capabilities and Operations
Satisfactory
Focus Area
Focus Area
Focus Area
Below are summaries of the progress that occurred between the June 2021 assessment and the end of FY
2021.
Strategic Objective 1.1: Understand the Sun, Earth, solar system, and universe.
LEAD OFFICE
Science Mission Directorate (SMD)
GOAL LEADER
Karen Flynn, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management, SMD
Since NASA's inception, scientific discovery regarding Earth, the Sun, the solar system, and the universe
beyond has been an enduring purpose of the Agency. NASA conducts scientific exploration enabled by
observatories that view Earth from space, observe and visit other bodies in the solar system, and gaze out
into the galaxy and beyond. NASA's science programs focus on three interdisciplinary objectives: discovering
the secrets of the universe, searching for life in the solar system and beyond, and protecting and improving
life on Earth.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
NASA's 2021 Strategic Review determined that Strategic Objective 1.1 showed Satisfactory Performance.
Programs and projects within the science portfolio had clear strategies in place to achieve the objectives
described in the 2018 Strategic Plan. External experts again rated NASA's FY 2020 progress for the nine sup-
porting science Performance Goals as having met or exceeded expectations. While the COVID-19 pandemic
has had and will continue to have significant impacts, evaluations of near, mid, and long-term objectives
provide sufficient evidence that SMD projects effectively support Strategic Objective 1.1.
NASA uses the recommendations of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine's
decadal surveys as an important input in planning and prioritizing the future of its science programs. For
almost 50 years, decadal surveys have proven vital in establishing a broad consensus within the national
science community on the state of science, the highest priority science questions to address, and actions
that can be undertaken to answer those questions. NASA uses these recommendations to prioritize future
flight missions, as well as technology development and proposals for theoretical and suborbital supporting
research. In determining the content of the science portfolio, NASA also considers national priorities and
policies, actual budgets, existing technological capabilities, partnership opportunities, and other program-
matic factors.
While COVID-19 has resulted in substantial cost and launch readiness impacts for missions in formulation
and development, NASA has continually assessed changing needs in order to focus resources on critical
activities. Such efforts enabled the on-time launch and successful landing of the Mars 2020 mission to seek
signs of life on Mars. The mission's Ingenuity Mars helicopter performed the first powered, controlled flight
of an aircraft on another planet, then transitioned into an operations demonstration that includes recon-
naissance of scientifically interesting sites that are outside the areas planned for access by the Perseverance
rover.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
143
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
NASA also launched the Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich satellite to continue the multi-decadal observational
record of ocean altimetry, conducted a successful asteroid sample collection at Bennu (OSIRIS-REx), and
completed integration and test of the James Webb Space Telescope in preparation for launch in early Fiscal
Year 2022. NASA confirmed the VIPER lunar rover project, which will conduct investigations of volatile distri-
butions on the Moon, and completed the Critical Design Review for Europa Clipper, which will investigate the
habitability of Jupiter's moon Europa. The Parker Solar Probe continued its prime mission as it flew within 16
Solar Radii of the Sun's surface in 2021.
Examples of the scientific advancements considered in the 2021 assessment are described in the FY 2021
performance explanations under Strategic Objectives 1.1 and 1.2 in Part 2.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 1.1,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
1
1
1
2
80%
60%
23
23
10
40%
9
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 1.2: Understand the responses of physical and biological systems to
spaceflight.
LEAD OFFICE
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD)*
GOAL LEADER
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator, HEOMD
The International Space Station (ISS), conceived and constructed to be a laboratory in space, provides oppor-
tunities to understand the role of gravity in physical and biological systems. As a research and technology
development facility, the ISS provides the capability for human-tended, long-duration space-based research,
which is critical to the research and development of technologies supporting Artemis and future deep space
exploration. ISS research also supports investigations in human physiology and biotechnology. As NASA's
only current long-duration, crewed orbital testbed, the ISS is used by researchers to study the effects of
long-duration exposure to the space environment on the crew and devise and test countermeasures to
offset health risks.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Noteworthy
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
144
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
The 2021 Strategic Review determined that Strategic Objective 1.2 showed Satisfactory Performance towards
achieving the strategy described in the 2018 Strategic Plan. NASA funded and is performing research studies
that address the known risks as defined by the current human exploration plan. NASA also established
broad-based partnerships with other U.S. government agencies, private industry, and international partners
to advance scientific space-based research and technology development aboard the International Space
Station (ISS).
NASA's strategy for prioritizing and enabling fundamental physical and biological systems research is
guided by several studies released by the National Academies' over the past two decades, including the 2011
decadal survey Recapturing a Future for Space Exploration: Life and Physical Sciences Research for a New. We
continued to develop the parameters of the next decadal survey on physical and life sciences; the outcome
of the decadal survey will inform future research priorities. Mid-term goals will be established based on this
new decadal survey and will be prioritized and executed as supported by the budget.
New Space Act agreements are testing the marketplace for commercially viable low Earth orbital platforms
to advance human subject and biological and physical sciences research beyond the ISS program. NASA
has well-established outreach to industry, academia, and international agencies and will continue to lever-
age these partnerships to advance NASA exploration goals and for enhancing space physical and biological
studies.
Due to COVID-19 protocols, the Human Research Program (HRP) and Biological and Physical Sciences (BPS)
personnel who contribute to achievement of this Strategic Objective have limited access to laboratories to
conduct research as planned. However, during FY 2021, HRP has the highest priority for ISS utilization, and
all HRP inflight requirements are being met, with nine ISS studies in progress. Consistent with the 2020
Strategic Review assessment, grant extensions were necessary and there were impacts to project develop-
ment schedules and costs.
Beginning with the 2022 Strategic Review, the BPS portfolio contributes to the achievement of Strategic
Objective 1.2 and the HRP portfolio will support achievement of Strategic Objective 2.3.
*The Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate was divided into the Exploration Systems
Development Mission Directorate and Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD) on October 1, 2021.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 1.2,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
60%
1
1
1
1
40%
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
145
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Strategic Objective 2.1: Lay the foundation for America to maintain a constant human
presence in low Earth orbit enabled by a commercial market.
LEAD OFFICE
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD)
GOAL LEADER
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator, HEOMD
NASA is enabling a space-based low Earth orbit economy by transitioning the International Space Station
(ISS) operations and maintenance to commercial and international partners, while continuing to leverage ISS
for research and technology development. NASA is maximizing ISS utilization and throughput, using diverse
commercial acquisition strategies, and offering customers research capacity in both space and Earth-similar
laboratories. NASA is also working to develop a healthy commercial supplier base for low Earth orbit activ-
ities and addressing acquisition policy by looking for ways to eliminate barriers to commercialization. All
aspects of crew health are managed as part of this strategic objective, as well, including implementation of
a comprehensive health care program for astronauts and the prevention and mitigation of negative, long-
term health consequences of space flight.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Noteworthy
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
The 2021 Strategic Review determined that Strategic Objective 2.1 achieved Satisfactory Performance. NASA
continued the targeted strategy, which was sustainable, cost effective, safe, and built on and applied the
many lessons learned from over a decade of work and experience with commercial companies. NASA estab-
lished the Commercial LEO Development program office in the third quarter of FY 2020, and in FY 2021,
we updated the commercial use and private astronaut pricing policy. NASA successfully released the final
Commercial LEO Destinations solicitation and conducted a Pre-Proposal Conference in the third quarter,
including one-on-ones with industry. Commercial LEO Destinations proposals were due in the fourth quar-
ter, with awards made in December 2021.
The Commercial LEO Development program continued to execute the strategy focused on engagement with
potential commercial providers. The first private astronaut mission (PAM) to the ISS was with Axiom Space's
Ax-1 mission, which launched on April 8 aboard a SpaceX Crew Dragon vehicle. Proposals for the next two
PAMs to the ISS were received in FY 2021 fourth quarter. In FY 2021, nearly a dozen Space Act Agreements
and one PAM contract have been executed.
NASA plans to launch at least five technology demonstrations in FY 2021, further extending insight and
knowledge into critical capabilities necessary for deep space exploration. NASA exceed expectations
launching seven technology demonstrations to the ISS in FY 2021. Technology demonstrations initiated on
orbit include Astrobee, Spacesuit Evaporation Rejection Flight Experiment (SERFE), Spacecraft Fire Safety
(Saffire) V, Water Processor Assembly (WPA) Cat Reactor, Brine Processor Assembly (BPA), Universal Waste
Management System (UWMS), Airborne Particulate Monitor, and the Collapsible Contingency Urinal (CCU).
NASA is enabling a space-based low Earth orbit economy by transitioning the ISS operations and mainte-
nance to commercial and international partners, while continuing to leverage ISS for research and technol-
ogy development. NASA continues to work with the Center for the Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS)
to implement the findings and recommendations of the 2020 Independent Review Team report. In FY 2021,
NASA and CASIS initiated several actions designed to realign CASIS activities with NASA's evolving commer-
cial goals, including the development of new metrics designed to measure CASIS performance, and the
development of a new, more transparent selection model for proposals.
Commercial LEO Development program personnel were able to make appreciable progress towards this
Strategic Objective in a work from home environment. COVID impacts to technology development include
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
146
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
requests from contractors for additional funds to mitigate the impact to several technologies' launch sched-
ules.
*The Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate was divided into the Exploration Systems
Development Mission Directorate and Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD) on October 1, 2021.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 2.1,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
1
2
60%
3
2
40%
1
20%
1
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 2.2: Conduct human exploration in deep space, including to the sur-
face of the Moon.
LEAD OFFICE
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD)
GOAL LEADER
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator, HEOMD
Artemis will return American astronauts to the surface of the Moon. NASA will land the first woman and
next
man on the Moon** using innovative technologies to explore more of the lunar surface than ever
before. This is a collaborative effort with commercial and international partners and establishes sustainable
exploration. NASA will use what was learned on and around the Moon to take the next giant leap-sending
astronauts towards Mars. We are designing mission capabilities that will support multiple objectives in deep
space and enable increasingly complex missions to a range of destinations. These capabilities will form
a
sustainable architecture comprised of exploration ground systems, a launch system, a deep-space human-
rated module, a lunar gateway around the Moon, lunar landers, and a new generation of spacesuits.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Focus Area
Focus Area
Satisfactory
Space Launch System (SLS) and Exploration Ground Systems (EGS) rebaselined their Agency baseline com-
mitments in FY 2020, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic; while the new Agency baseline commitments did not
account for COVID impacts, both programs remain close to their rebaselined amounts. EGS is very slightly
over their baseline costs, and both the SLS and EGS were on schedule for the Launch Readiness Date.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
147
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
The Orion program has increased in scope to include development of a docking capability, supporting
increasingly complex missions. As a result of this increase in scope, COVID-19 impacts, and other factors, the
Orion program rebaselined.
Orion, SLS, and EGS, achieved major technical, programmatic, and acquisition milestones in FY 2021. The
Orion crew capsule was delivered to the EGS program at Kennedy Space Center for processing activities on
January 14, 2021, and SLS successfully completed the year-long Green Run series of tests at Stennis Space
Center on March 18, 2021. On April 27, 2021, the SLS Core Stage was shipped from Stennis Space Center to
Kennedy Space Center for integration and readiness activities that will lead to the Artemis I launch, which
was planned for late 2021 at the time this update was written.
Development on Artemis Il and III hardware progressed, with the Artemis Il Crew module undergoing
environmental and propulsion system processing at Kennedy Space Center. EGS completed their Artemis Il
checkpoint in late FY 2021 fourth quarter, successfully demonstrating that the program's plans and designs
that will be used to process, launch, and recover the crewed Artemis II mission are at a Critical Design
Review (CDR) level and meet requirements with acceptable margin, risk, and constraints.
Gateway program design and development activities also progressed, with a series of element-level design
reviews in FY 2021. The Gateway program was developing initial cost and schedule estimates, in prepara-
tion for the scheduled program Key Decision Point (KDP)-I in FY 2022. In FY 2021, the Gateway program
signed Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA), and the European Space Agency (ESA) for the development and provision of key
Gateway elements and capabilities. In FY 2020, NASA announced that the Power and Propulsion Element
(PPE) and the Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO) would be co-manifested on a single commercial
launch vehicle, eliminating the need for two separate launch vehicles and on-orbit assembly. In February
2021, NASA selected SpaceX to launch the PPE/HALO co-manifested vehicle.
NASA is pursuing a strategy that engages with industry in developing a sustainable lunar landing capabil-
ity. In FY 2021 first quarter, NASA completed the Human Landing System (HLS) Continuation Reviews and
reviewed the HLS Option A proposals addressing the first lunar landing missions. The three HLS base period
contracts were originally scheduled to complete at the end of February 2021; however, NASA issued no-cost
extensions through April 30, 2021, to allow NASA to complete the Option A selection and award process
and to preserve the ability to seamlessly transition from the base period contracts to the Option A contract
vehicle.
NASA announced on April 16, 2021, that we selected SpaceX to continue development of the first commercial
HLS under the Artemis program. On April 26, we were notified that Blue Origin Federation and Dynetics filed
protests challenging the HLS Option A selection with the Government Accountability Office (GAO). On April
30, we implemented a no-cost extension through August 9, 2021, to each of the base period HLS contracts
(Blue Origin Federation, Dynetics, and SpaceX).
On July 30, GAO denied the Blue Origin Federation and Dynetics protests. NASA then completed HLS Option
A Authorization to Proceed with SpaceX. We were notified on August 16 that the Blue Origin Federation
had filed a protest with the U.S. Court of Federal Claims following the denial of their protest with the GAO.
Subsequently, we voluntarily paused work with SpaceX for the HLS Option A contract, effective August 19
through November 1. All parties agreed to an expedited litigation schedule that concluded on November 1
with the U.S. Court of Federal Claims ruling in NASA's favor.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted workforce availability and hardware development across the Exploration
Systems Development Division (ESD) and Advanced Exploration Systems (AES) portfolio, reflecting significant
COVID supplier and performance challenges. Early calculations showed up to 35 percent overall growth to
baseline plans on multiple critical activities from March 2020 through September FY 2021. In certain critical
activities, growth included general ongoing inefficiency impacts of approximately 10 percent.
*The Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate was divided into the Exploration Systems
Development Mission Directorate (ESDMD) and Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD) on October 1,
2021.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
148
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
**NASA refocused this effort on landing the first woman and first person of color on the Moon starting
during FY 2021.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 2.2,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
1
80%
2
1
60%
2
40%
3
2
1
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 3.1: Develop and transfer revolutionary technologies to enable explora-
tion capabilities for NASA and the Nation.
LEAD OFFICE
Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD)
GOAL LEADER
Mike Green, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management, STMD
As NASA embarks on its next era of discovery and exploration, the advancement of transformational space
technologies serves as a necessary trailblazer for the journey ahead. We invest in crosscutting and trans-
formational technologies that have high potential for offsetting mission risk, reducing cost, and advanc-
ing existing or creating new capabilities. Our investments center around technologies that enable NASA's
science and human exploration missions, as well as foster growth in the domestic industry and harnessing
innovation and entrepreneurship through partnerships with universities, small businesses, and other gov-
ernment agencies. Through leadership in space technology, NASA will contribute to growing the U.S. indus-
trial and academic base by transferring space technology into the space economy, continuing the Nation's
economic leadership.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
NASA's 2021 Strategic Review resulted in a continued rating of satisfactory performance. Even in the face of the
COVID-19 pandemic, NASA has continued to develop and demonstrate technologies, as well as transfer and
transition technologies within the Agency, throughout the Federal Government, and to a variety of academic
institutions and industry partners. NASA remains focused on building public-private partnerships with the U.S.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
149
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
aerospace industry to develop capabilities that support the needs of the varied mission architectures of its vast
array of stakeholders. Specific examples of recent accomplishments under this Strategic Objective include the
launch of 12 technologies on board the Mars 2020 Perseverance Rover, including successful demonstrations of
the Mars Oxygen In-Situ Resource Utilization Experiment (MOXIE) and Terrain Relative Navigation (TRN), 15 new
industry-developed Tipping Point space technologies to develop commercial space capabilities and benefit future
NASA missions, 30 patent licenses executed for the Ventilator Intervention Technology Accessible Locally (VITAL)
ventilator design (i.e., to help meet health care needs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic), and significant
progress made towards demonstration of a range of space technologies (e.g., Low-Earth Orbit Flight Test of
an Inflatable Decelerator (LOFTID), Deep Space Optical Communications (DSOC), Laser Communications Relay
Demonstration (LCRD)).
Although Strategic Objective 3.1 has a clear strategy for success, there have been impacts due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Some technology maturation and demonstration projects are experiencing cost and schedule impacts
due to restricted facility access, supply chain disruptions, and testing delays. For example, restricted access to
Jet Propulsion Laboratory facilities caused a delay to the final Autonomous Pop-Up Flat Folding Explorer Robot
(A-PUFFER) test, leading to a delayed Agency Priority Goal FY 2020 milestone; this milestone was completed in
May 2021. Some early-stage projects as well as commercial sector partnerships have experienced disruptions due
to the inability to access research facilities. NASA's small business partners are facing similar disruptions due to
facility closures, supply chain disruptions, and difficulties in teleworking. Additional delays could impact projects'
abilities to secure partnerships with industry, academia, and other government agencies, thereby further erod-
ing schedule and deliveries.
While some STMD projects were experiencing cost, schedule, technical, and/or programmatic challenges, the
STMD portfolio were on track overall to meet its Strategic Objective and included several technology demon-
strations planned for the next few years. Examples include Deep Space Optical Communications (DSOC), LOFTID,
Polar Resources Ice Mining Experiment (PRIME)-1, On-Orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing (OSAM)
2, Blue Origin Demo of Deorbit, Descent, and Landing Sensors (BODDL-TP), and the Cislunar Autonomous
Positioning System Technology Operations and Navigation Experiment (CAPSTONE) small spacecraft demonstra-
tion. In the mid- to long-term, STMD has identified 16 long-term outcomes as priority areas of focus, each of
which addresses anticipated gaps across multiple stakeholder architectures.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 3.1,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
2
60%
4
4
4
40%
2
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
150
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Strategic Objective 3.2: Transform aviation through revolutionary technology research,
development, and transfer.
LEAD OFFICE
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate (ARMD)
GOAL LEADER
William Harrison, Portfolio Analysis & Management Office, Director, ARMD
Envisioning the long-term plan for aeronautics research provides the basis for new concepts leading to
industry innovation and societal benefits. The future holds new challenges for the aviation community,
including the need to achieve continued growth that meets increasing global demand, safely integrate
unmanned aircraft systems and other innovative vehicle concepts with myriad of applications, and proac-
tively adapt to often rapidly changing conditions. NASA aims to solve these challenges in ways that minimize
adverse impacts on the environment.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
An analysis of global trends has led NASA to identify three "Mega Trends" which will shape our aeronauti-
cal research plans during the coming years. First, global growth in demand for high-speed mobility reflects
rapid growth in demand for mobility and new modes of transportation. Second, affordability, sustainability,
and energy use presents severe challenges in balancing economy with environment. Third, technology con-
vergence points to convergence in sectors such as materials, manufacturing, energy, and information and
communication technologies that will transform aeronautical capabilities and air transportation options.
NASA organizes the aeronautics research portfolio around six Strategic Thrusts, prioritizing aeronautics
objectives in response to the above-mentioned Mega Trends and feedback from the aviation community.
The six Strategic Thrusts are safe, efficient growth; commercial supersonic aircraft; ultra-efficient subsonic
transport; safe, quiet, and affordable vertical lift air vehicles; in-time system-wide safety assurance; and
assured autonomy for aviation transportation.
NASA focuses its aeronautics research on high-risk, high-payoff research investments that will enable the
transformation of aviation to serve future needs, produce demonstrable benefits, and leverage technology
advances outside of, as well as within, traditional aviation disciplines. Major technology emphases include
electrified aircraft propulsion, low-sonic-boom supersonic flight, automation and autonomy, and fostering
new aviation applications in Advanced Air Mobility (AAM). Collectively, these efforts, other technologies, and
a focus on technology convergence will develop transformative solutions towards the ultimate goal of a
safe, efficient, adaptive, scalable, and environmentally sustainable global aviation system.
NASA uses an active process and seeks continuous feedback on its overall strategy as well as performance.
These efforts include: NASA Advisory Council (NAC) Aeronautics Committee reviews/reports; internal analy-
sis for budget formulation; inter-agency coordination with partners including FAA and DOD; Interaction with
international standard-setting groups such as ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization); roundtables
with subject matter experts convened by the National Academies; strategic planning efforts that include
trend analysis (which led to ARMD's Three Mega Trends); gap analysis (which led to ARMD's 6 Strategic
Thrusts); systems analysis by internal multi-center groups as well as ARMD-commissioned studies using
external analytical groups; OMB and Congressional directions from the appropriations process; and AIAA
(American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics) special conference sessions to obtain expert feedback.
Performance review efforts include: Annual program reviews for all ARMD projects, which include exter-
nal Independent Review Panels (IRPs) and Mission Directorate Reviews (four ARMD programs reporting
to the Associate Administrator every December); relevant Key Decision Point (KDP) or similar reviews that
occur for projects that within the scope of NASA Performance Requirements 7120.5 and 7120.8; Baseline
Performance Review (BPR) quarterly presentations by ARMD; NASA's Annual Performance Report and
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
151
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Agency Performance Plan published together as the Volume of Integrated Performance; external reviews
such as GAO's annual Assessments of Major Projects; and other internal peer-reviews.
All four ARMD programs identified moderate to significant COVID-19 impacts. In the Advanced Air Vehicles
Program (AAVP), impacts were primarily related to availability of wind tunnel testing and other research
facilities at Ames Research Center, Glenn Research, and Langley Research Center and corresponding delays
to experimental research activities. In the Airspace Operations and Safety Program (AOSP), researchers
experienced dramatic reduction in air traffic volume resulting in lower availability of data and hardware/
software facilities. In the Integrated Aviation Systems Program (IASP), the Low Boom Flight Demonstration
(LBFD) project experienced manufacturing delays, many due to pandemic-related shutdowns. In the
Transformative Aeronautics Concepts Program (TACP) program, the University Innovation project identified
concerns with access to campus buildings and experimental facilities limiting ability of team members to
complete research on schedule. In addition, the Aerosciences Evaluation and Test Capabilities (AETC) Office
identified significant impacts to its 12 large wind tunnels and anticipated pandemic-related delays in main-
tenance activities, which would impact tunnel reliability for NASA and external customers. Within ARMD's
four programs and AETC, expenses continued to accrue even though most of our experimental facilities
were fully or partially shut down.
As of end of third quarter of FY 2021, 40 percent of ARMD's FY 2021 success measures were rated Yellow.
ARMD used reserves to recover and complete these measures by the end of FY 2021.
Highlights of ongoing critical efforts include:
Continuing work to complete final assembly of the aircraft for LBFD and deliver the aircraft for
community response flight testing in FY 2024. The community response data will be delivered to
ICAO, a United Nations specialized agency supporting diplomacy and cooperation in air transport,
to allow supersonic aircraft flight over land. LBFD recently completed its Delta KDP-D.
The Electrified Powertrain Flight Demonstration (EPFD) projectStarting Phase A formulation activi-
ties for the Electrified Powertrain Flight Demonstration project, which is focusing on flight demon-
strations that advance the state-of-the-art in megawatt-class electric aircrafts.
Completing system integration and verification and validation testing in preparation for flight test
of the X-57 Maxwell Mod Il electric aircraft.
Completing formulation activities for the Advance Air Mobility project; developing an initial Urban
Air Mobility airspace management system; and maturing System Concept, Architecture, and Book
of Requirements.
Closing out Airspace Technology Demonstration (ATD-1/2/3), Unmanned Aircraft Systems
Integration in the National Airspace System (UAS-NAS), Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic
Management (UTM), and Advanced Composites project activities and transferring the research
results to stakeholders such as RTCA, the Federal Aviation Administration, and Advanced
Composites Consortium.
Continuing formulation activities to develop hybrid thermally-efficient small core gas turbine
engines, ultra-efficient Transonic Truss-Braced Wing (TTBW) airplanes, and high-rate composite
aircraft manufacturing processes.
Continuing fundamental research and providing unique expertise and facilities to support com-
mercial hypersonic interests.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
152
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 3.2,
FY 18-2021Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
1
1
2
80%
1
60%
6
40%
5
4
4
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 3.3: Inspire and engage the public in aeronautics, space, and science.
LEAD OFFICES
Missions Support Directorate and Office of Communications (OCOMM)
GOAL LEADER
Johnny Stephenson, Associate Administrator, Office of Communications
NASA will inspire and engage the public and provide unique science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) opportunities for diverse audiences. By increasing public knowledge about NASA's work, the Agency
can contribute to science literacy and an improved national understanding and appreciation of the value
of STEM work and careers. The Agency also believes that it can help strengthen diversity in STEM fields by
ensuring that grantee universities comply with Federal requirements for minimizing and addressing issues
related to discrimination and harassment. NASA is employing a strategy that seeks to inspire, engage, edu-
cate, and employ the next generation of explorers through NASA-unique STEM learning opportunities. NASA
engages the public and students in its mission by providing authentic learning experiences with NASA's
people, content, and facilities; building a diverse future workforce; and contributing to exploration missions.
NASA's education and outreach functions each play a critical role in increasing public knowledge of NASA's
work, fostering an understanding and appreciation of the value of STEM, and enhancing opportunities to
teach and learn.
OCOMM serves as the corporate, Agency-wide communications function for NASA, providing a wide prac-
ticable and appropriate dissemination of information to news and media organizations and the general
public concerning the objectives, methods, and results of NASA programs. OCOMM connects people to
NASA's missions and accomplishments as we explore the unknown, enable technologies for improving life
on earth and inspire the world.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
In FY 2021, NASA completed the design of an integrated Agency communications team through the Mission
Support Future Architecture Program (MAP). Under this program, the Agency realigned communications
resources to enable the communications enterprise to operate more efficiently and sustainably. The newly
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
153
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
established communications enterprise management office is instituting business process improvements
that will better enable the enterprise to keep the public informed about NASA's activities. Other benefits of
the program include:
Increased coordination of Agency communications efforts and messaging in partnership
with Mission Directorates;
Expanded focus on strategic planning, integration, and budgeting process;
OCOMM budget aligned and monitored at a higher level, with increased planning and risk moni-
toring, and flexibility across functions and missions as needs change; and
Enhanced workforce agility across the enterprise, reduced single-point-failures, greater collabora-
tion across geographic boundaries.
NASA continues to integrate metrics and using data to inform decisions on better reaching the public,
engaging stakeholders and evaluate outcomes. The agency continues to use data to refine content and
social media distribution platforms, targeted to audience preferences.
Large, popular events and major activities, including the OSIRIS-REx Touch-and-Go event, NASA's SpaceX
Crew-1 launch and splashdown, Sentinel-6 Michael Freilich Satellite Launch, Green Run Hot Fire Test 1 and 2
(Artemis), Mars 2020 Perseverance Landing, Mars Ingenuity First Flight, Earth Day 2021, and Crew-2 Launch,
drove an increase in followers of our flagship digital accounts. Growth in social media across its flagship
accounts.
The Office of STEM Engagement (OSTEM) is enhancing the effectiveness of STEM engagement investments
using performance assessment and evaluation-driver processes, including the execution of a Learning
Agenda. The OSTEM Learning Agenda puts forth learning questions with associated sub-questions, learning
activities, and assessment methodologies, and learning products that will inform OSTEM's understanding of
the scope, methods, mechanisms, and outcomes from its investments. During 2020, OSTEM achieved 100
percent (3 of 3) of its Performance Goals and success criteria and executed four evidence-building activities
in support of its comprehensive performance assessment and evaluation strategy. OSTEM shared findings
and recommendations from learning activities, performance assessments, and evaluation activities with
internal and external stakeholders in order to make programmatic evidence-based decisions and updates to
the OSTEM Learning Agenda.
COVID-19 had an impact on the delivery of in-person STEM Engagement events, driving the need for OSTEM
to transition to implementation of virtual student engagement activities (NASA STEM @ Home Resources).
OSTEM implemented a risk-management strategy to ensure that all methods of participant engagement
were captured for the purposes of 2020 and beyond.
The Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity (ODEO) began utilizing voluntary resolution agreements
to
ensure compliance with civil rights laws under which the Agency is undertaking compliance review and
assessment. In conducting a compliance assessment of Louisiana State University, ODEO determined the
university was in non-compliance with Title IX and, therefore, unable to provide equal opportunity regard-
less of sex in its educational programs. ODEO required Louisiana State University to sign a voluntary res-
olution agreement to come into compliance with Title IX, principally relating to appropriate resources to
conduct effective Title IX coordination and to ensure its Title IX procedures are prompt and equitable. In
addition, ODEO received confirmation from two other grantees on which it had conducted compliance
reviews under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. These
grantees, Science Museum of Minnesota and Virginia Air and Space Center, have undertaken 100 percent of
NASA compliance recommendations and corrective actions.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
154
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 3.3,
FY 2018-2021Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
60%
5
5
5
3
40%
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 4.1: Engage in partnership strategies.
LEAD OFFICE
Mission Support Directorate (MSD)
GOAL LEADER
Robert Gibbs, Associate Administrator, MSD
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
NASA is establishing appropriate partnerships to achieve the Agency's Mission using contracts to acquire
property or services and/or partnership agreements using other statutory authorities to implement mutu-
ally beneficial activities for NASA and its partner. The strategy for the success of this Strategic Objective
focuses on four areas: 1) Execute innovative, effective, and efficient procurement solutions and contracts
that enable NASA's mission; 2) Implement education and outreach to small businesses on how to part-
ner with NASA and its commercial partners; 3) Enable NASA's international and interagency partnerships
through management of agreements, engagements, guidance; and 4) Enable domestic, non-Federal part-
nerships that are strategic and beneficial for NASA through transparency, education, awareness, and out-
reach opportunities, and identify partnership resources and capabilities for the public.
The Office of Procurement (OP) has established a Closeout Capability Group with representatives from
across the Agency. This team provides a cohesive approach to closeout processes and procedures instead
of a Center-by-Center approach. As a result of the data analysis and closeout process oversight provided
by this team, OP now has a quarterly target of 1,500 contract closeouts and most recently surpassed the
quarterly target. OP has engaged with mission partners to jointly develop short-term procurement strate-
gies tailored to the 26 product service lines and begin the transition to long-term strategies. Sixteen product
service lines have transitioned to long-term strategies.
The Partnership Office is helping NASA expand our strategic non-procurement partnerships and meet
mission objectives by increasing the number of new partners with whom we do business. Our public "NASA
Partnerships" website and other outreach efforts are effective tools for accomplishing this objective. In FY
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
155
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
2021 (as of September 9, 2021), the Agency established partnerships with 107 new domestic, non-Federal
partners with whom we had not had previous agreements, and we established 59 new international agree-
ments.
The Office of Small Business Programs (OSBP) is meeting the percentage goal (as assigned by the Small
Business Administration) of dollars obligated to small businesses on both the prime and subcontracting
levels. OSBP also is refining the virtual outreach program.
The Office of International and Interagency Relations (OIIR) established a baseline of international partners
and identified 778 new international partnerships in FY 2020 and it projected establishing 720 new partner-
ships in FY 2021. COVID-19 closures have led to delays in the ability to meet milestones initially established
under some non-procurement partnership agreements. As a result, some existing partnership agreements
with both Federal and non-Federal partners have had to be extended, and in some cases, agreements were
terminated due to the inability to perform the work within the timeframe required by the partner.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 4.1,
FY 2018-2021Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
1
60%
3
2
1
40%
1
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 4.2: Enable space access and services.
LEAD OFFICE
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD)
GOAL LEADER
Altonell (Toni) Mumford, Deputy Associate Administrator, HEOMD
NASA uses private and government capabilities to ensure that people, payloads, and data can be delivered
to and from space. NASA achieves this through a portfolio of services and strategic capabilities, including
launch services for robotic missions, commercial space transportation for crew and cargo, ground- and
space-based communications, and specialized test facilities.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Noteworthy
Commercial Crew Program partner SpaceX launched Crew-1, their first post-certification mission (PCM), in
November 2020, with crew returning on May 2, 2021. SpaceX's launched its second PCM mission, Crew-2, on
April 23, and the Commercial Crew Program met the FY 2021 goal of flying two crew transportation missions
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
156
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
to the ISS. Boeing continued to make progress mitigating issues identified during their Orbital Flight Test
(OFT) mission and is working to re-fly their uncrewed demonstration flight at the earliest opportunity.
NASA is successfully managing launch service capabilities across the civil space sector, and is managing
multiple NASA acquisitions, including the award of the Artemis Program Habitation and Logistics Outpost
(HALO) + Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) and a one-off contract for Europa Clipper. New contract
mechanisms are in development, including the award of new Venture Class acquisitions. The Launch
Services Program (LSP) managed two launches in FY 2021, with 10 advisory and 7 primary missions mani-
fested for launch in the next fiscal year. Four new commercial launch vehicle certifications are in progress in
FY 2021, and LSP is providing early insight into several emerging vehicles through multiple contract mecha-
nisms. LSP continues to support Commercial Resupply Services, Commercial Crew Program, and Artemis by
providing advisory expertise and contract awards while evaluating HLS requirements and staffing needs.
The Rocket Propulsion Test (RPT) program provided test services to internal and external customers
throughout FY 2021-most notably, the successful Space Launch System (SLS) Core Stage hot fire testing in
March. To date, the RPT program has provided 99.7 percent on-time delivery of 288 tests conducted across
multiple centers at the stage, engine, and component level under diverse test conditions. Artemis-related
activities that RPT supported included testing of the RS-25 engine, Orion risk reduction, and European
Service Module propulsion qualification testing. A significant level of demand from the commercial sector
was also supported. The RPT program continues to maintain a test capacity "right sized" approach to meet
Agency requirements; through strategically prioritized facility maintenance and modernization projects, RPT
infrastructure continues to perform well beyond their design lifetime.
Space Communications and Navigation (SCaN) supported the Mars 2020 Perseverance rover landing,
Cygnus NG-15, Emirates Mars Mission Mars Orbit Insertion, and OSIRIS-REx asteroid sample collection, pro-
viding the communications services necessary to support all NASA robotic and Commercial Crew Program
missions. The Deep Space Network Aperture Enhancement Project (DAEP) in Madrid, Spain, went opera-
tional in FY 2021. The NASA networks continue to perform well above the 95 percent requirement and are
aligning upgrades and development activities with both the new SCaN Architecture Study and the Artemis
plans, with the initiation of the Commercial Services project.
The COVID operational environment has increased the risk of the RPT program's ability to address critical
maintenance and modernization projects. DAEP antenna work continued throughout FY 2021, with the oper-
ational staff in Spain available at a reduced level due to very high local pandemic levels of COVID-19.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 4.2,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
1
1
1
80%
60%
6
7
7
40%
5
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
157
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Strategic Objective 4.3: Assure safety and mission success.
LEAD OFFICE
Technical Authorities: Office of the Chief Engineer (OCE), Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer
(OCHMO), and Office of Safety and Mission Assurance (OSMA)
GOAL LEADER
Mark Weyland, Director, Medical Policy and Ethics
NASA uses discipline experts, known as Technical Authorities, to provide authoritative and indepen-
dent decisions on application of requirements across our programs and projects. This includes evalu-
ating hardware, software, environmental conditions, and human performance expectations. Technical
Authorities identify hazards, including the impacts of new requirements and departures from exist-
ing requirements, and evaluate risk acceptability. NASA uses these decisions to assure that risks are
addressed or mitigated to an acceptable level, improving the likelihood that missions, programs, and
operations will be completed safely and successfully. NASA's Technical Authorities are increasing aware-
ness and reducing risk across the Agency through their roles.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Focus Area
Satisfactory
Focus Area
While Strategic Objective 4.3 has a clear strategy for success, there have been impacts due to the COVID-
19 pandemic. The Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer (OCHMO), a Technical Authority, is
heavily involved in COVID-19 planning and operations at the Agency level along with the White House.
Although no activities were dropped during FY 2021 due to the pandemic, and OCHMO was able to over-
see execution of human-rated and robotic missions, some activities have been delayed due to compet-
ing priorities. In addition, occupational health audits at Centers were delayed due to travel restrictions
and Center closures.
NASA's Technical Authorities increased awareness and reduced risk across the Agency through their
roles. We continued to enhance training programs, knowledge sharing events, and communications to
expand Safety and Mission Assurance awareness and technical expertise, while updating our guidance
on orbital debris mitigation, planetary protection, and nuclear safety in accordance with presidential
direction and advisory panel recommendations. The Agency also continued to establish early, consis-
tent, and proper level of engagement (standards development and requirements definition, design,
development, test, and evaluation) with NASA programs and commercial space industry to advise, advo-
cate, and ensure the health and performance of astronauts and pilots.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 4.3,
FY 8-2021Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
60%
2
1
3
3
40%
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
158
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Strategic Objective 4.4: Manage human capital.
LEAD OFFICE
Mission Support Directorate (MSD), Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO), and Office of
Diversity and Equal Opportunity (ODEO)
GOAL LEADER
Robert Gibbs, Associate Administrator, MSD
NASA is cultivating a diverse and innovative workforce with the right balance of skills and experience to
provide an inclusive work environment in which employees that possess varying perspectives, education
levels, life experiences, and backgrounds can work together and remain fully engaged in the Mission.
NASA strategy for this objective is to equip NASA for mission success by supporting mission workforce
planning, acquiring top talent quickly, enhancing how people work, and growing employees and leaders
and to create an inclusive environment for all NASA employees to feel engaged and safe to raise con-
cerns.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Noteworthy
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
NASA formed the Talent Acquisition and Learning Office (TALO) to integrate all staffing services into a
central enterprise-level office to provide direction and leadership for more efficient and effective hiring
and development services. These changes in structure will work to address the increase in average time
to hire for FY 2020. In order to address this increase in time to hire, NASA has taken advantage of sev-
eral new hiring authorities and is migrating to the USAStaffing website. OCHCO is implementing process
changes to reduce the workload for hiring managers and hiring specialists. For example, increasing the
use of bundling hires allows multiple hires to be made from a single vacancy announcement, reducing
the time spent on the earlier stages of the hiring process. NASA continues to track and monitor hires to
ensure quality is not sacrificed for speed. We continue to have very high quality of hire ratings by man-
agers and high 2-year retention rates to support this.
In response to COVID-19 impacts, additional support has been given to supervisors to ensure they have
the skills and tools necessary to effectively manage their workforce through an uncertain and stress-
ful time in a virtual environment. This includes training on managing a virtual workforce and providing
directions on how to best utilize available collaboration tools. New processes have been implemented
to shift to virtual on-boarding/off-boarding, which allowed for employees to onboard without having to
physically visit a Center.
NASA has made progress in implementing strategies focused on creating an inclusive environment
for all employees to feel engaged and safe to raise concerns. NASA has established a Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion Steering Committee (DEISC), which will be formulating and implementing Administration
DEI initiatives through a DEISC Action Plan for the Agency. NASA has also established the DEI Strategic
Partnership composed of the DEISC Members, officials in charge, and representatives from all Employee
Resource Groups to socialize and refine our initiatives and share best practices. We took initial steps in
implementation of Executive Order (EO) 13985, Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved
Communities Through the Federal Government, which revokes EO 13950. NASA issued a revocation of
policy related to EO 13950 as it applied to NASA and its contractors. We are implementing an Agency
Unity Campaign, which has resulted in NASA highlighting "Inclusion" as an Agency Core Value; imple-
mentation of a new Diversity, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO), and Unity requirement for all
Senior Executive Service performance plans, with work underway on a similar requirement for manag-
ers and supervisors; reissuance of 3 workforce policy statements for diversity and inclusion, EEO, and
anti-harassment; 500 listening/dialogue sessions hosted with participation by well over 10,000 NASA
personnel; development of new training courses on unconscious bias and unity; and increased commu-
nications to the NASA workforce on DEI and NASA's missions and projects.
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
159
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
The ODEO Associate Administrator is developing a Gender Policy Strategy with the White House
Interagency Working Group on Science, Technology and Climate, and ODEO has submitted its Initial
Gender Policy Strategy directly to the working group.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 4.4,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
1
60%
2
1
3
40%
1
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 4.5: Ensure enterprise protection.
LEAD OFFICE
Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) and Enterprise Protection Program
GOAL LEADER
Jeff Seaton, Chief Information Officer, and David Adams, Principal Advisor for Enterprise Protection
NASA's enterprise protection approach requires collaboration across the Agency and our Federal and
commercial partners. NASA assesses existing and planned architectures, requirements and policies,
technology, systems, workforce, and other relevant protection factors. Analysis of these assessments
inform strategic, actionable recommendations to reduce protection-related risk. As part of these efforts,
NASA partners with the Department of Homeland Security to modernize, and consolidate where appro-
priate, the Agency's cybersecurity infrastructure in alignment with the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) cybersecurity framework.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Focus Area
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Satisfactory
We coordinated our efforts to increase the Agency's resilience. The Enterprise Protection Program (EPP)
established a cross-cutting biweekly dialogue comprised of EPP, Mission Directorate representatives, the
Independent Verification and Validation Facility, Centers, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. EPP insti-
tuted tracking at Enterprise Protection Board (EPB) meetings to ensure that the Cybersecurity Task Team
recommendations and other assigned actions are accomplished. The EPB held 9 meetings from July
2020 through August 2021, addressing emerging protection topics that require strategic collaboration.
EPP formed several working groups to address 6 goals under a zero-based review of critical Agencywide
enterprise protection topics.
The Agency closed all remaining operational technology (OT) security recommendations from the Office
of the Inspector General (OIG) in its 2017 report titled Industrial Control System Security within NASA's
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
160
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
Critical and Supporting Infrastructure. We identified all OT systems that are part of our critical infrastruc-
ture and validated that more than 50 percent of these systems have a current Authorization to Operate
(ATO), achieving our annual Performance Goal target for a Green rating. NASA continued implementing
policy revisions to include requirements related to OT security.
NASA maintained an overall rating of "Managing Risk" based on its quarterly Federal Information
Security Management Act (FISMA) assessment reports, the highest score for Federal agencies to demon-
strate progress toward implementing fundamental cybersecurity requirements. The Agency met 7 out
of 10 cybersecurity targets for the IT Modernization Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goal, meeting NASA's
annual Performance Goal target for a Green rating.
NASA continues to implement Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) cybersecurity capabili-
tiesAgency-wide. CDM sensors enable cybersecurity personnel to identify assets on the network and
vulnerabilities to remediate. As of August 2021, NASA completed 100 percent installation of CDM sensors
on the Agency's corporate systems, 98 percent on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's corporate systems, 96
percent on the Agency's mission systems, 81 percent on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's mission systems,
and 100 percent on the NASA Communications System. Final operating capability is anticipated by the
fourth quarter of FY 2022, delayed from the fourth quarter of FY 2021 target due to the COVID-19 pan-
demic.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 4.5,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
80%
1
2
60%
2
2
40%
1
20%
1
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
Strategic Objective 4.6: Sustain infrastructure capabilities and operations.
LEAD OFFICE
Mission Support Directorate (MSD)
GOAL LEADER
Robert Gibbs, Associate Administrator, MSD
NASA is providing the facilities, tools, and services required to efficiently manage, operate, and sustain
the infrastructure necessary to meet mission objectives. NASA has adopted a facilities maintenance
and operation philosophy that proactively pursues and adopts the safest, most cost-effective blend of
reliability-centered maintenance techniques, sustainability practices, and safety procedures. An Agency
facilities master plan establishes priorities (over a 20-year projection) for construction, demolition, and
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
161
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
maintenance. NASA uses a centralized approach in providing standardized, timely, and accurate busi-
ness support for services.
2018
2019
2020
2021
Strategic Review Assessment
Satisfactory
Focus Area
Focus Area
Focus Area
NASA has made progress towards meeting near-term success criteria, which are essential for devel-
oping an Agency master plan. However, we continue to face looming budget issues and challenges
with our extremely aged infrastructure and increased unplanned maintenance, consuming as much as
30 percent of the maintenance budget, resulting in potential mission impacts. Right-sizing efforts are
underway to reduce footprint and cost, but the pace of change is limited by our ability to invest in con-
struction, demolition, and new technology to build a more resilient, reliable infrastructure.
NASA is making progress towards getting a Mission Dependency Index (MDI) score for all of our facilities,
with a focus identifying the high-MDI facilities and correlate them to the Facility Condition Index (FCI).
MDI and FCI correlation will guide prioritization for capital repair and renewal projects. NASA averages
an annual unfunded maintenance liability of approximately $130 million to sustain our infrastructure,
coupled with 80 percent of our facilities beyond their useful life, compounds the growing deferred main-
tenance backlog (currently $2.66 billion). This increases mission risk. Categorizing assets by MDI versus
FCI will help NASA invest limited resources in the most mission critical assets.
We continue to demolish facilities with low MDI and low FCI, resulting in 51 facilities demolished in FY
2020, surpassing the target of 20 facilities. NASA's mid-term goal is to use this information to inform
repair and renewal investments, maintenance prioritization through a tiered maintenance system, and
leverage condition-based maintenance and reliability-centered maintenance. NASA continues to seek
and implement courses of action to strategically mitigate risks and leverage opportunities. Nonetheless,
investment in construction, renewal/revitalization, and maintenance of facilities is essential to ensure
ready and reliable facilities to support mission requirements.
NASA has identified and quantified energy use in types/classes of facilities that are significant energy
users. While exceeding statutory energy and water reduction goals (reducing energy use intensity in
buildings subject to the goals by more than 43 percent in FY 2020, compared to the 2003 baseline, and
reducing water use intensity over 33 percent, compared to the 2007 baseline), achieving continual year-
over-year reductions, has become increasingly challenging. In order to meet this challenge, the Agency
analyzed significant energy users that have not traditionally been included in energy conservation mea-
sures analyses due to their unique mission applications and identified and prioritized energy and water
consumption reduction opportunities.
Summary of Progress for Performance Goals Contributing to Strategic Objective 4.6,
FY 2018-2021 Supporting the 2018 Strategic Plan
100%
1
1
80%
60%
3
3
40%
2
2
20%
0%
PG
PG
PG
PG
FY 2018
FY 2019
FY 2020
FY 2021
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
162
APPENDIX B
FY 2021 Summary of Progress Update
2022 Strategic Plan Mapping
2022 Strategic Plan
2018 Strategic Plan
Strategic Goal 1: Expand Human Knowledge
Strategic Goal 1: Expand human knowledge through
Through New Scientific Discoveries
new scientific discoveries
Objective 1.1: Understand the Earth system and its
Objective 1.1: Understand the Sun, Earth, solar system, and
climate
universe.
Objective 1.2: Understand the sun, solar system, and
Objective 1.2: Understand responses of physical and biological
universe
systems to spaceflight
Objective 1.3: Ensure NASA's science data are accessible
to all and produce practical benefits to society
Strategic Goal 2: Extend Human Presence to the
Strategic Goal 2: Extend human presence deeper
Moon and onto Mars for Sustainable Long-term
into space and to the moon for sustainable long-
Exploration and Utilization
term exploration and utilization
Objective 2.1: Explore the surface of the moon and deep
Objective 2.1: Lay the foundation for America to maintain a constant
space
human presence in low Earth orbit enabled by a commercial market
Objective 2.2: Develop a space economy enabled by a
Objective 2.2: Conduct exploration in deep space, including to the
commercial market
surface of the Moon
Objective 2.3: Develop capabilities and perform research
to safeguard explorers
Objective 2.4: Enhance space access and services
Objective 4.2: Enable space access and services
Strategic Goal 3: Catalyze Economic Growth and
Strategic Goal 3: Address societal challenges and
Drive Innovation to Address National Challenges
catalyze economic growth
Objective 3.1: Innovate and advance transformational
Objective 3.1: Develop and transfer revolutionary technologies to
space technologies
enable exploration capabilities for NASA and the Nation
Objective 3.2: Drive efficient and sustainable aviation
Objective 3.2: Transform aviation through revolutionary technology
research, development, and transfer
Strategic Goal 4: Enhance Capabilities and
Strategic Goal 4: Optimize capabilities and
Operations to Enable the NASA of Tomorrow
operations
Objective 4.1. Engage in partnership strategies
Objective 4.1: Attract and develop a talented and diverse
Objective 4.4: Manage human capital
workforce
Objective 4.5: Ensure enterprise protection
Objective 4.3: Assure safety and mission success
Objective 4.2: Transform mission support capabilities for
Objective 4.4: Manage human capital
the next era of aerospace
Objective 4.6: Sustain infrastructure capabilities and operations
Objective 3.3: Inspire and engage the public in aeronautics, space,
Objective 4.3: Build the next generation of explorers
and science
NASA's FY 2023 Volume of Integrated Performance
163
