National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASA
MISSION EQUITY
NASA EQUITY
Action Plan
2
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
35
NASA stands poised to usher in a bold new era of discovery -
preparing to return astronauts, including the first woman and
first person of color, to the Moon and open the way for human
exploration of Mars. We are expanding scientific understanding
of the universe, and extending the bounds of human capability
in aeronautics, astronautics, the quest for resources, and the
protection of our home planet.
As ever, we reach for the stars, and seek to unlock the mysteries
of the cosmos itself.
Yet, one of our biggest challenges lies here at home. As NASA
ushers in the third great era of human space exploration, we take on
a renewed challenge of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility.
In response to Executive Order 13985, "Advancing Racial Equity
and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal
Government, we are working to recognize and overcome the
Bill Nelson,
visible and invisible systemic barriers that hinder equitable,
NASA Administrator
inclusive access - by individuals or communities - to the
government programs, resources, and opportunities that make
all of NASA's work possible.
The eminent American writer James Baldwin said, "Not everything
that is faced can be changed; but nothing can be changed until
it is faced." To chart America's course in space, we first must
embrace and empower the whole of our nation here at home.
To that end, I am pleased to present NASA's Equity Action Plan,
Forward.
which outlines and reaffirms our Agency's strategy to successfully
mitigate systemic barriers to equity. NASA must ingrain the
lessons learned from our nation's storied "Hidden Figures" in
all of our endeavors today. This plan seeks to further identify
Upward.
and remove the barriers that limit opportunity in historically
underserved and underrepresented communities and anchor
equity as a core component in every NASA mission to inspire a
Onward.
new, more inclusive generation.
For NASA, the sky has never been the limit - and this is our
opportunity to make limitless the potential of all Americans, to
uphold the legacies of Katherine Johnson and Mary Jackson, of
Sally Ride, Ronald McNair, Mae Jemison, and Soichi Noguchi, in
all NASA's future endeavors.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN 12
Executive Summary
Agency
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
NASA's Mission
NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and
inspires the world through discovery.
NASA's Journey
As NASA extends humanity's reach into the cosmos - readying Artemis-generation
astronauts to return to the Moon as prelude to new journeys to Mars; launching new
science missions to explore the depths of the universe; and working to enrich lives and
protect resources across Earth - the Agency also has spent the past year looking inward,
evaluating its most essential assets: the richly skilled and invaluable human team which
conducts the nation's business in space. And now, we cast our view outward once more,
refining and redefining how we engage with underserved communities across the nation
to sustain those assets and ensure NASA's success for generations to come.
During the Equity Action Plan process, NASA recognized the need to continuously
improve its data systems, processes, and analytics, which inform and underpin
all Agency focus areas, actions, and outcomes. NASA is taking immediate steps
to improve its Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility (DEIA) data analytic
capabilities, identifying key data sources - both internal and external to NASA - to
support DEIA analytics and reporting; creating an information architecture that turns
data-driven results into strategic and operational decisions; automating data acquisition
to improve data quality and speed up results; establishing a technical infrastructure and
applying industry best-practice, cloud-based analytic tools; and adopting user-friendly
analytic products, dashboards, and models aligned to NASA's internal systems.
Now, NASA is continuing its journey towards equity. We are assessing our programs,
identifying systemic barriers, and engaging in external and internal outreach - all to ensure
fair, impartial access and representation for all those who seek to contribute to our nation's
great work in space. To this end, NASA has established four foundational focus areas:
Increase Integration and Utilization of Contractors and Businesses from Underserved
Communities to Expand Equity in NASA's Procurement Process
is
Enhance Grants and Cooperative Agreements to Advance Opportunities, Access, and
Representation for Underserved Communities
Leverage Earth Science and Socioeconomic Data to Help Mitigate Environmental
Challenges in Underserved Communities
Advance External Civil Rights Compliance and Expand Access to Limited English
Proficient (LEP) Populations within Underserved Communities
Focusing on these areas, coupled with improved data analytics, will better equip NASA to
track progress on closing systemic barriers to access, and advancing equity.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
4
Equity in Procurements
Equity in Climate
and Contracts
Data Accessibility and
Environmental Justice
Equity
in Action
Equity in Civil Rights
Equity in Grants and
Compliance and
Cooperative Agreements
Accessibility to Limited
sis
English Populations
Equity in Procurements and Contracts
NASA established a pilot DEIA incentive to encourage
and services from AbilityOne, which provides employment
large and small contractor's partnerships and
to people who are blind or have significant disabilities.
mentorships with underserved communities under
their contracts.
NASA published guidance on October 28, 2021
in the NASA FAR (Federal Acquisition Regulation)
NASA issued a new procurement policy in an October
Supplement, establishing a requirement for contractors
26, 2021 memorandum to the contracting workforce to
to provide a DEIA plan upon award to demonstrate
encourage, and offer guidance on, purchasing supplies
commitment to diversifying their workforce.
Equity in Grants and Cooperative Agreements
NASA began transitioning its science grant proposal
NASA's Science Mission Directorate launched a No Due-
review process to a Dual Anonymous Peer Review
Date program as part of its 2021 research opportunities
system - where names of reviewers and proposers are
to help principal investigators achieve better work-life
kept hidden - to increase fairness and reduce hidden
balance and to give smaller institutions more opportunity
biases for research awards.
to submit proposals.
NASA updated science policy documents to
NASA's Science Mission Directorate held initial activities to
require diversity and inclusion reports on selection
develop long-term relationships with new, diverse partners,
recommendations. Updates are underway to ensure review
better reflect the diversity of the nation, and enable greater
panels reflect demographics of the scientific community
participation by underrepresented groups in agency efforts.
and operate under a DEIA-consistent Code of Conduct.
In FY21, NASA selected 11 small business technology
NASA updated its Guidebook for Proposers,
program proposals valued at a combined $540,000 - six
highlighting a commitment to solicit projects that foster
from Historically Black Colleges and Universities and five
STEM education and participation by underrepresented or
from Hispanic-serving institutions - to receive inaugural
underserved students and education organizations.
research planning grants.
Equity in Climate Data Accessibility and Environmental Justice
NASA Earth Science and its Socioeconomic Data
NASA responded to census data identifying a lack of
and Applications Center conducted their first Equity
potable water in the homes of at least 70,000 Navajo
and Environmental Justice Virtual Workshop to
Nation residents to create a Drought Severity Assessment
facilitate increased communication between NASA and
Tool, helping to monitor conditions and resource allocation.
Environmental Justice communities.
Equity in Civil Rights Compliance and Accessibility to Limited-English Populations
NASA required institutions receiving agency grants to
NASA released its first interactive graphic novel in
submit information on their compliance with Federal
English, Spanish, and visually impaired versions. Its first
anti-discrimination laws and also expanded its basis for
Spanish-language presentation of a planetary landing
conducting Civil Rights compliance reviews of institutions
earned more than 3.2 million views, 39 Spanish-media
receiving grants.
interviews, and significant social media following.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
5
Focus Areas, Barrier
Identification, and Actions
NASA's Equity Action Plan Accountability
& Tracking Progress:
Internal Accountability: NASA's Administrator established an
Even as we fly to
Executive Team, led by the Deputy Administrator, to guide the Agency's
the other planets
equity efforts throughout NASA Centers, Mission Directorates, and
organizations. NASA also established a Leadership Council, comprised of
and search for signs
Employee Resource Groups, Center Directors, Associate Administrators,
of life elsewhere,
and senior leadership, led by the Office of Diversity and Equal
we must commit
Opportunity, to provide quarterly reports to the Executive Council.
This plan will complement and synchronize with NASA's Strategic Plan
ourselves to build a
currently in development. In addition, those responsible for execution will
better world here on
be held accountable through their Performance Management Plans.
Earth, one with equal
External Accountability: NASA established a "Mission Equity" section of
opportunities for all.
our web page where we will publicly post regular updates on the progress
of our Equity Action Plan and solicit opportunities for public engagement.
- NASA ADMINISTRATOR
Coupled with targeted external outreach to underserved communities, this
BILL NELSON
will provide public accountability. The Agency will conduct regular public
town hall meetings to share progress on our equity efforts and gather
feedback from external stakeholders, and solicit input from the National
NASA Advisory Council and other External Advisory Councils.
Tracking Progress: NASA commits to developing metrics and tracking
systems as we implement action items and conduct early assessments of
outcomes during FY22.
NASA's Perseverance Mars rover mission
commentator and Guidance, Navigation, and
Control Operations Lead Swati Mohan studies
data in mission control. NASA/Bill Ingalls
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN I
6
Focus Area 1:
Increase Integration and Utilization of Contractors and Businesses from
Underserved Communities to Expand Equity in NASA's Procurement Process
Since it was established in 1956, NASA has grown as the world leader in space exploration. However, the Agency
is not only focused on the stars and travel to other worlds but on contributing to a better world here on Earth as
well. This is most apparent in the "spinoff" space exploration technologies that have been adapted and adopted
to improve everyday life.
The Agency's reach is not limited to technology. NASA is committed to promoting Diversity, Equity, Inclusion,
and Accessibility, seeking to open doors of opportunity for all as it launches the next great era of human space
exploration with Artemis missions to the Moon and eventual flights to Mars. A key avenue for promoting such
equity is in the Agency's purchasing power.
In 2021 alone, NASA spent $19.6 billion on goods and services, including about
$2 billion (10% of total expenditure) obligated to small disadvantaged businesses.
The Agency's annual goods and services expenditure represents an invaluable tool
for contributing to the health and diversity of the national economy. By focusing its
$19.6
purchasing decisions and paying particular attention to Small Businesses classified
as Disadvantaged-, HUBZone-, Service-Disabled Veteran-, and Women-Owned,
billion
the Agency can promote equitable economic investment and spur innovation.
The key is to ensure Agency contract opportunities are open to all. When
In 2021 alone, NASA
NASA sought public feedback through a Request for Information on
spent $19.6 billion on
Advancing Racial Equity in Support for Underserved Communities in NASA
goods and services,
Programs, Contracts, and Grants Processes, half of the requests specific to
including about $2 billion
procurement and contracts were to increase outreach, training, technical
(10% of total expenditure)
assistance, and communications on how to do business with the Agency.
obligated to small
disadvantaged businesses.
These requests identify obvious barriers to overcome. The NASA contract
procurement structure, processes, and requirements can be perplexing. Training
and technical assistance to help businesses and institutions understand and
navigate the process are limited. There also is a simple lack of awareness of the many contract opportunities
that are available. The challenge is for NASA to do a better job understanding these barriers and engaging with
contractors in underserved communities - and the Agency is determined to do so through three key actions:
Study barriers in NASA procurement and contracting programs. On one end, the Agency will work to
identify underrepresented businesses that are eligible to compete for procurement contracts but are not
submitting proposals. On the other end, the Agency will seek to identify why underrepresented businesses
who did apply may not have been selected for contracts. The study will include Agency focus groups with
members of underserved communities and is expected to be completed by March 2023. It will help NASA to
(1) understand why underserved communities are not submitting proposals and receiving contract awards and
(2) minimize or remove those barriers.
Increase engagement events in underserved communities. NASA is committed to increase engagement with
stakeholders in underserved communities, particularly those in HUBZone (Historically Underutilized Business
Zones), Small Businesses, Small Disadvantaged Businesses, Women-Owned, and Service-Disabled Veteran-
Owned Small Businesses. The Agency plans to do so by (1) hosting informational learning series and training
sessions; (2) holding regular meetings with business, industry, and underserved community representatives;
and (3) exploring a partnership with the Department of Commerce's Minority Business Development Agency to
maximize resources and outreach. NASA's goal is to increase the number of outreach events for underserved
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
7
communities 50% by fiscal year 2029. It also will seek to increase the number of businesses and institutions from
underserved communities participating in these events by 5% to 10% annually.
Use set-aside Product Service Lines to increase contract opportunities for underserved communities.
NASA has updated its acquisition process to require contracts for certain Product Service Lines (PSLs) to be
set-aside for small business categories and AbilityOne Programs. These areas include custodial, communication
services, grounds maintenance, STEM engagement, protective services, acquisition support, and financial
support services. As existing contracts end, this change will be fully implemented with the awarding of new
contracts. In the next three to five years, the amount of money obligated to underserved communities under the
current NASA set-asides for small businesses and AbilityOne contractors is projected to be $2.3 billion.
Focus Area 2:
Enhance Grants and Cooperative Agreements to
Advance Opportunities, Access and Representation for
Underserved Communities
NASA awards about 3,000 grants and cooperative agreements each year, the
majority across a range of science disciplines. However, underserved communities
and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) including Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), Predominately Black Institutions (PBIs), Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs), Tribal Colleges or Universities (TCUs), Native American Non-
Tribal Institutions (NANTIs), Alaskan Native- or Native Hawaiian-Serving Institutions
Victor Joel Cabezas Tapia, a Navigation,
Guidance, and Control Engineer at NASA's
(ANNHIs), Asian American-and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions
Marshall Space Flight Center, speaks about his
(AANAPISIs) - are generally underrepresented in those awards. For instance, there
path to working at NASA during an interactive
are more than 700 federally designated MSIs, which represents about 14% of all
STEM discussion with students attending the
70th International Astronautical Congress,
degree-granting institutions of higher education in the country. However, only 6%
Oct. 23, 2019, at NASA Headquarters in
of the $1.3 billion that NASA spends on its grants and cooperative agreements
Washington. NASA/Joel Kowsky
each year is awarded to MSIs and small/minority-owned businesses.
The Agency is committed to closing the percentage gap, which means
identifying barriers that are in place and how they can be addressed. These
may include such hindrances as access to information, inadequate resources,
3,000
and a lack of understanding about the Agency's grant process. Feedback from
the Request for Information certainly suggests as much, with multiple sources
NASA awards about 3,000
citing the need for targeted training and technical resources. In addition,
grants and cooperative
the default grant proposal review process, in which reviewers are aware of
agreements each year, the
applicants' names and other identifying information, may be a barrier that
majority across a range of
promotes bias in selections. Whatever the barriers, preliminary data suggests
science disciplines.
that NASA grant and cooperative agreement awards could be distributed more
equitably. To address the issue, NASA plans to:
Conduct a barrier analysis of NASA grants and cooperative agreements. The Agency is reviewing its grant
and cooperative agreement process to (1) identify Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority-Serving
Institutions and small/minority-owned businesses that are eligible to compete for awards but are not submitting
proposals and (2) analyze barriers for those that did not apply or applied but did not receive awards. The study,
scheduled for completion by the end of 2024, will allow the Agency to identify and address recurring barriers. It
also is expected to promote an increase in the diversity of individuals and institutions participating in NASA grant
and cooperative agreement programs.
Increase outreach and training to underserved communities. A key to increasing the participation of small
and minority businesses in NASA grants and cooperative agreements lies in (1) making them aware of the
opportunities and (2) providing the tools, resources, training, and knowledge needed to partner with the Agency.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
8
To that end, NASA will implement a series of six training sessions per year and increase our outreach workshops
and events to four per year. The Agency will evaluate the effectiveness of these efforts by developing surveys to
collect feedback from training and outreach participants. It also will review data to determine if new and first-
time participants are subsequently submitting proposals, and how many of those proposals are being funded.
Expand Dual Anonymous Peer Review of grant proposals. A key to increasing participation of underserved
communities in NASA grants is ensuring fairness in the selection process. In 2021, NASA began expanding a
Dual Anonymous Peer Review (DAPR) process, supported by the National Academy of Science, in which names
and identities of reviewers and proposers are kept hidden in select competitions. The anonymous process has
been shown to increase fairness and reduce hidden biases. For instance, in previous NASA Astrophysics Data
Analysis Program solicitations, women constituted 26% of applicants but finished in the top two places in the
selection panel rankings just 16% of the time. When the DAPR process was implemented, women constituted
31% of applicants and were in the top two rankings 32% of the time. NASA plans to study lessons learned from
the implementations and adopt the new process for all applicable Research Opportunities in Space and Earth
Sciences (ROSES) by fiscal year 2024. The Agency plans to expand use of DAPR and other mechanisms even
more by fiscal year 2026, helping to promote more representative selection rates for its award programs.
Launch the Science Mission Directorate Bridge Program. Feedback to NASA from the RFI emphasized
the need for the Agency to facilitate closer partnerships with various institutions and communities. In
response, NASA plans to launch the Science Mission Directorate Bridge Program in 2022, contingent on
availability of resources, with a budget of $5 million in FY22 and $7.5 million in FY23, to foster collaboration
and partnerships between NASA centers and Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Minority-Serving
Institutions, Primarily Undergraduate Institutions, and very high research universities. The program will focus
on paid research and engineering internships, apprenticeships, and research experiences for
faculty. The overarching goal is to create an environment where underserved
communities are better equipped to partner with NASA.
Focus Area 3:
Leverage Earth Science and Socioeconomic Data
to Help Mitigate Environmental Challenges in
Underserved Communities
Landsat 9 Satellite launched. NASA Science
The world faces a host of environmental challenges - poor air and water quality, sea-level rise, extreme heat, and
more. As a world leader in Earth science, NASA understands these challenges well, using an extensive network of
satellites and observation systems to collect comprehensive data about the atmosphere, oceans, land, and life.
The nation has made a great investment in these NASA satellites and science initiatives. The Agency wants to
ensure that investment benefits people across the nation, and particularly those in underserved and marginalized
communities who face great environmental challenges. For those who live in persistently impoverished and
vulnerable areas, these challenges are particularly acute.
NASA data can help. The first step is making environmental and science data available so it can be combined
with other socioeconomic information. This will enable researchers to identify at-risk communities and the
challenges that confront them. In turn, the communities will be able to use the data to prepare and make good
decisions about how to address those challenges.
NASA has a longstanding commitment to make its data available to all. However, availability does not guarantee
accessibility. To help ensure its data is both available and accessible, NASA held an inaugural workshop in 2021
to listen to social science representatives who work with Environmental Justice issues and groups. The Agency
also collected input from other informal discussions and from a public call for feedback about equity.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
9
NASA astronaut candidate Kayla
Barron is seen after donning her
spacesuit. NASA/Bill Ingalls
The combined responses suggest key barriers in the Agency's effort to use its data to promote Environmental
Justice and include: (1) challenges finding and accessing relevant NASA data; (2) limited collaboration between
NASA researchers and social scientists; and (3) a lack of experience using NASA data.
The Agency is determined to overcome these barriers, particularly for communities severely impacted by
environmental challenges, through the following actions:
Make selections for new grants to advance equity and Environmental Justice. NASA's Earth Science Division
is committed to provide opportunities for members of its investigator community to work with colleagues in
other disciplines to address Environmental Justice issues. In December 2021, the Agency posted a solicitation
on advancing Equity and Environmental Justice. Those selected for awards will apply Earth science, geospatial,
and socioeconomic data to issues of Environmental Justice. Responses to solicitations are due March 18, 2022,
with grants awarded August 31, 2022. Based on the outcomes and impacts of these grants, the Earth Science
Division will consider releasing similar solicitations in the future.
Make data available on the cloud and convert many data sets to widely
accepted formats for easier use. In 2022, to help ensure accessibility of its
collected Earth science information, NASA will make its 50 most-requested
50
environmental data sets of last year available on the internet cloud, with
full transfer of NASA Earth science data to the cloud by 2025. It also will
In 2022, to help ensure
convert many of these data sets to widely accepted formats for easier use.
accessibility of its collected
Additionally, the Agency will host data sets that have significant value for
Earth science information,
Environmental Justice on the Amazon Web Services Open Data platform. It
NASA will make its 50 most-
also will develop code to help researchers easily access and visualize their
requested environmental
data on the platform. By moving information to the cloud, users will no longer
data sets of last year
need to download data files to their computer or device, allowing those with
available on the internet
less computing power to participate. The code to access data in the cloud
cloud, with full transfer of
also will be developed collaboratively, will be openly available, and will be
NASA Earth science data to
in common formats. This will allow people from different backgrounds and
the cloud by 2025.
expertise to access and analyze data sets more easily.
Provide free, multi-lingual training on how to use NASA data to address
priority needs in underserved communities. In 2022, NASA plans to
train about 2,700 users how to use NASA data to address key environmental issues, such as air quality,
flooding, and water resources management. Introductory trainings will be offered in English and Spanish,
allowing those in underserved communities to begin using NASA data specific to them. The Agency will
use both online and in-person formats to make these training opportunities widely accessible. In 2023,
the Agency plans to begin offering new open sources science training programs to equip a broader
community of data users with the tools needed to access and use the increasingly accessible data.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
10
Focus Area 4:
Advance External Civil Rights Compliance and Expand Access to Limited English
Proficient Populations within Underserved Communities
From the outset, NASA has pursued a comprehensive vision that involves people of all communities sharing
in the achievements and accomplishments of space exploration and scientific discovery. Fulfilling that vision
requires ensuring all people - particularly those in underserved or minority communities - have opportunities
to participate in the work of the Agency. To that end, NASA diligently seeks to promote equity in its Agency
programs and activities, and to communicate information and opportunities as widely as possible.
There are barriers to overcome as the Agency strives in these areas. Many
recipients of Agency funding may not fully be aware of the requirements for
non-discrimination. This could be discouraging members of underserved
communities from participating fully in Agency programs and activities. In
8.2%
addition, census information indicates about 8.2% of the U.S. population
over age five speaks English "less than very well" and more than 25 million
In addition, census
people in the United States are not proficient in English. This barrier could be
information indicates about
limiting the ability for members of other language populations to access NASA
8.2% of the U.S. population
materials, resources, and program information.
over age five speaks English
"less than very well" and
There are challenges to overcoming these barriers. The Civil Rights
more than 25 million people
Compliance Review Program is limited in its ability to conduct review audits.
in the United States are not
In fact, the number of Civil Rights compliance review audits conducted is
proficient in English.
disproportionately low compared to the approximately 700 grant recipients.
Although the data is not complete, the low number of audits could be limiting
participation of underserved communities in NASA programs.
Historically, NASA also has conducted a majority of its public communications in English, creating a challenge
for members of some underserved communities to be fully knowledgeable about Agency opportunities and
activities. Only 7% of the overall NASA federalworkforce identifies as Hispanic or Latino - and the Agency's team
of bilingual communication specialists is even smaller.
NASA's SpaceX Crew-4 astronauts
participate in a training session at Kennedy
Space Center in Florida. SpaceX
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN I.11
An employee works on Artemis I Space Launch
System flight hardware. NASA/Cory Huston
The Agency is focused on addressing these challenges
and barriers by working to:
Increase Civil Rights compliance audits of NASA grantee institutions
receiving NASA funding. NASA is committed to increase its Civil Rights
compliance reviews to 10 per year by fiscal year 2024. It also will work to
increase the number of recommendations and corrective actions implemented
10
by grant institutions that are reviewed. Moving ahead, the Agency will seek
additional resources to increase the number of annual reviews even more.
NASA is committed to
The ultimate goal is to conduct reviews of all grant institutions, then move to
increase Civil Rights
a sustainment audit schedule. NASA also will conduct one Limited English
compliance audits od
Proficient grant review in this fiscal year, then plan additional reviews on a
grantee institutions receiving
regular basis. The Agency will explore the possibility of expanding review
Agency funding. NASA
audits to include Cooperative Agreements as well. At the same time, NASA
will increase its Civil Rights
remains committed to review proposed activities before awarding grants to
compliance reviews to 10
ensure there are no Civil Rights concerns. These actions, taken together, are
per year by fiscal year 2024.
intended to enable NASA better to monitor and correct Civil Rights violations
by grant institutions and to provide grant institutions with the tools needed to
comply with Federal laws.
Conduct a broad, proactive outreach campaign to increase awareness of NASA-funded opportunities and
legal protections ensured by Civil Rights laws. NASA's external Civil Rights communications historically have
targeted institutions receiving NASA funding. In an effort to be proactive and increase awareness of Agency
funding opportunities and include legal protections ensured by Civil Rights laws, NASA will widen its focus
to students, museum patrons, and educational and cultural institutions. Starting in FY22, the the Agency will
conduct an initial meeting with stakeholders to establish lines of communication and share outreach strategy. In
FY23, the the Agency will begin publication of quarterly compliance newsletters and collaborate with Federal
STEM partners to host Civil Rights compliance outreach events annually.
Communicate new terms and conditions for harassment reporting by grant recipients. In 2021, NASA
established a new requirement for grant institutions to report to the Agency any findings/determinations of
harassment involving Agency-funding Principal Investigators or co-investigators. NASA plans to communicate
the requirement to the authorized representatives of all current grant institutions by the end of June 2022. The
new requirement will enable the Agency to more rapidly identify violations and more effectively address systemic
barriers that prevent full protection of underrepresented communities.
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
12
Update NASA's Language Access Plan. NASA already has a wide reach in communicating with the public, but
the Agency is focused on extending meaningful access to its programs and activities to members of Limited
English Proficient communities. By January 2023, the Agency will publish an updated Language Access Plan for
accomplishing that goal. It will include efforts to (1) have multi-lingual communication pieces at NASA onsite visitors'
centers, including emergency evacuation signage and guided tours; and (2) provide multi-lingual education and
awareness opportunities for programs designed to inspire the next generation of scientists, engineers, and explorers,
such as astronaut appearances and school presentations. The overarching goal is to establish a more equitable
communications strategy for reaching members of Limited English Proficient populations.
Expand accessibility for Limited English Proficient populations, beginning
with communications in Spanish. U.S. census information indicates more
than 16 million people in the country speak Spanish as their first language,
making it the second most common language spoken in the United States. To
10%
reach members of this population, NASA plans to prioritize opportunities and
increase growth of Spanish communications 10% by 2025. The effort includes
To reach members of
plans to (1) provide a Spanish-language component to communications
the Spanish-speaking
campaigns, with an emphasis on high-level or high-visibility activities, such
population, NASA plans
as launches and major developments, and with messages targeted across
to prioritize opportunities
all mediums (social/web, print, radio, and television); (2) create a centralized
and increase growth of
website for all Spanish content by 2026; (3) increase Spanish content on NASA
Spanish communications
TV 10% by 2025; (4) explore creating and/or translating a broader array of
10% by 2025.
communication and educational products in Spanish, including materials for
its Visitor Centers, and (5) increase Spanish-speaking media trained subject
matter experts to 30 by 2023, and add members to its Spanish-language
communications teams to support increased outreach. NASA also plans to explore opportunities and options for
engaging directly with other Limited English Proficient communities, including initiatives to provide outreach,
events, seminars, and workshops in native languages.
For more information on NASA's Equity Action Plan,
please visit ittps://www.nasa.gov/mission-equity
QUITY
NASA EQUITY ACTION PLAN
I
13
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Mary W. Jackson NASA Headquarters
300 E Street SW (Hidden Figures Way)
Washington, DC 20546
https://www.nasa.gov/centers/hq
www.nasa.gov
