NUREG-2252, Vol. 1
U.S.NRC
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Protecting People and the Environment
Evidence
Building
Plan
Fiscal Year 2022
AVAILABILITY OF REFERENCE MATERIALS
IN NRC PUBLICATIONS
NRC Reference Material
Non-NRC Reference Material
As of November 1999, you may electronically access
Documents available from public and special technical
NUREG-series publications and other NRC records at the
libraries include all open literature items, such as books,
NRC's Library at www.nrc.gov/reading-rm.html. Publicly
journal articles, transactions, Federal Register notices,
released records include, to name a few, NUREG-
Federal and State legislation, and congressional re-
series publications; Federal Register notices; applicant,
ports. Such documents as theses, dissertations, foreign
licensee, and vendor documents and correspondence;
reports and translations, and non-NRC conference
NRC correspondence and internal memoranda; bulletins
proceedings may be purchased from their sponsoring
and information notices; inspection and investigative
organization.
reports; licensee event reports; and Commission papers
and their attachments.
Copies of industry codes and standards used in a
substantive manner in the NRC regulatory process are
NRC publications in the NUREG series, NRC regulations,
maintained at-
and Title 10, "Energy," in the Code of Federal Regulations
The NRC Technical Library
may also be purchased from one of these two sources:
Two White Flint North
11545 Rockville Pike
1. The Superintendent of Documents
Rockville, MD 20852-2738
U.S. Government Publishing Office
Washington, DC 20402-0001
These standards are available in the library for refer-
Internet: www.bookstore.gpo.gov
ence use by the public. Codes and standards are usually
Telephone: (202) 512-1800
copyrighted and may be purchased from the originating
Fax: (202) 512-2104
organization or, if they are American National Standards,
from-
2. The National Technical Information Service
American National Standards Institute
5301 Shawnee Road
11 West 42nd Street
Alexandria, VA 22312-0002
New York, NY 10036-8002
Internet: www.ntis.gov
Internet: www.ansi.org
1-800-553-6847 or, locally, (703) 605-6000
(212) 642-4900
A single copy of each NRC draft report for comment
Legally binding regulatory requirements are stated only in
is available free, to the extent of supply, upon written
laws; NRC regulations; licenses, including technical speci-
request as follows:
fications; or orders, not in NUREG-series publications. The
views expressed in contractor prepared publications in this
Address: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
series are not necessarily those of the NRC.
Office of Administration
Digital Communications and Administrative
The NUREG series comprises (1) technical and adminis-
Services Branch
trative reports and books prepared by the staff (NUREG-
XXXX) or agency contractors (NUREG/CR-XXXX), (2)
Washington, DC 20555-0001
proceedings of conferences (NUREG/CP-XXXX), (3)
E-mail: Reproduction.Resource@nrc.gov
reports resulting from international agreements (NUREG/
Facsimile: (301) 415-2289
IA-XXXX), (4) brochures (NUREG/BR-XXXX), and (5)
compilations of legal decisions and orders of the Com-
Some publications in the NUREG series that are posted
mission and the Atomic and Safety Licensing Boards and
at the NRC's Web site address www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/
of Directors' decisions under Section 2.206 of the NRC's
doc-collections/nuregs are updated periodically and may
regulations (NUREG-0750).
differ from the last printed version. Although references
to material found on a Web site bear the date the material
DISCLAIMER: This report was prepared as an account
of work sponsored by an agency of the U.S. Government.
was accessed, the material available on the date cited
Neither the U.S. Government nor any agency thereof, nor
may subsequently be removed from the site.
any employee, makes any warranty, expressed or implied,
or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for any third
party's use, or the results of such use, of any information,
apparatus, product, or process disclosed in this publication,
or represents that its use by such third party would not
infringe privately owned rights.
Abstract
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC or the agency) is an independent agency established by
the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, which began operations in 1975 as a successor to the Atomic of
2018 to develop an agency evidence-building plan. An evidence-building plan is a systematic approach
Energy Commission. The NRC is required by the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
for identifying and addressing priority questions relevant to the agency's programs, policies, and
regulations. More broadly, it is a coordination tool to engage stakeholders in evidence planning and and
foster building an agency culture of learning and continuous improvement. Once an evidence-building plan is
to
help
achieve
an
agency's
mission.
The
evidence-building
plan
is
intended
to
emphasize
implemented, decisionmakers can use the resulting evidence to guide choices to improve the agency
programs, policies, and regulations. The evidence-building plan includes nine priority questions to
support agency needs and the fiscal years 2022 - 2026 strategic goals and objectives.
the
Table of Contents
Abstract
iii
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018
1
About the NRC
1
Purpose
1
Methodology
2
Evidence-Building Plan Priority Questions
2
Priority questions for Strategic Plan Goal 1 - Ensure the safe and secure use of radioactive
materials
5
Priority Question 1: How can the NRC improve the agency's licensing and oversight programs
based on recent operational experience and lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic?
5
Priority Question 2: What data received and maintained would be most beneficial for use in advanced
analytical tools (e.g., machine learning, artificial intelligence) to support NRC decisionmaking?
6
Priority Question 3: To what extent are the NRC's computer codes capable of supporting
independent analysis of the safety of advanced reactor designs and operations?
8
Priority Questions for Strategic Plan Goal 2-Continue to foster a healthy organization
10
Priority Question 4: To what extent are licensing actions performed by the NRC becoming more
or less resource intensive over time and have there been any changes in work product quality?
10
Priority Question 5: To what extent are NRC's workforce planning processes adequately
accommodating potential workload fluctuations?
11
Priority Question 6: What process improvements can be implemented to make the NRC a
more modern, risk-informed regulator and how are they aligned with performance indicators?
13
Priority Question 7: How can the NRC better leverage research conducted through
NRC-sponsored university research and development grants?
14
Priority Questions for Strategic Plan Goal 3 - Inspire stakeholder confidence in the NRC 16
Priority Question 8: How can the NRC improve external engagement to inspire
stakeholder confidence?
16
Priority Question 9: To what extent are the NRC's programs, policies, and activities addressing
environmental justice?
17
V
P
°.
Evidence Building Plan
Fiscal Year 2022
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018
The Foundations for Evidence-Basec Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act),¹ signed into law
January 14, 2019, emphasizes collaboration and coordination to advance data and
evidence-building functions in the Federal Government. The Evidence Act statutorily mandates
Federal evidence-building activities, open Government data, confidential information protection,
and statistical efficiency. Evidence includes fact finding, performance measurement, policy
analysis, and program evaluation used to make critical decisions about program operations,
policy, and regulations, and to gain visibility into the impact of resource allocation on achieving
program objectives." The Evidence Act builds on longstanding principles underlying Federal
policies and data infrastructure investments supporting information quality, access protection,
and evidence building and use."2 The Evidence Act requires the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC), as a Chief Financial Officers Act agency, to develop an evidence-building
plan.
About the NRC
Congress created the NRC as an independent agency in 1974. Its mission is to license and regulate
the Nation's civilian use of radioactive materials, to provide reasonable assurance of adequate
protection of public health and safety, and to promote the common defense and security and
to protect the environment. The NRC regulates commercial nuclear power plants, nuclear fuel
cycle facilities, decommissioning of licensed facilities and sites, nuclear waste, and other uses of
nuclear materials, such as the medical use of radioactive materials, through licensing, inspection,
and enforcement of its requirements.
The NRC is committed to meeting the intent of the Evidence Act by evaluating the effectiveness
and efficiency of its programs and their contributions to achieving the agency's mission.
Evaluations and other evidence-building activities conducted by the NRC are expected to adhere
to the standards discussed in the NRC's "Evidence-Building and Evaluation Policy Statement" (86
Fed. Reg. 29,683; June 3, 2021).
Purpose
The evidence-building plan is a systematic approach for identifying and addressing priority
questions relevant to the agency's programs, policies, and regulations.³ More broadly, it is
a
coordination tool to engage stakeholders in evidence planning and building to help achieve
1
Pub. L. No. 115-435, 132 Stat. 5529 (2019).
2
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-19-23, "Phase 1 Implementation of the Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance," pp. 1-2, July 10, 2019.
3 5 U.S.C. § 312(b).
0
0
e
0
0
P
an agency's mission. The evidence-building plan is intended to emphasize and foster an agency
culture of learning and continuous improvement. Once an evidence-building plan is implemented,
decisionmakers can use the resulting evidence to guide choices to improve the agency programs,
policies, and regulations. The priority questions in the evidence-building plan include key areas to
support agency needs and the fiscal years (FYs) 2022 - 2026 strategic goals and objectives.
Methodology
The priority questions for the evidence-building plan were solicited from internal and external
stakeholders using multiple approaches. Internally, the NRC used a crowd-sourcing platform to solicit
potential priority questions and feedback from the NRC staff. The NRC staff submitted potential
priority questions with topics ranging from automating data generation to improving agency processes.
Externally, the NRC solicited stakeholder input to develop the strategic plan, including the priority
questions for the evidence-building plan. In September 2020, representatives of various stakeholder
groups (e.g., industry, the public) participated in a public meeting and provided comments in response
to a Federal Register notice. The input the NRC received was reviewed and combined with the input
provided by the NRC staff to develop a set of proposed priority questions that align with the agency's
strategic priorities. The NRC's Data Governance Board, comprising senior agency officials, further
refined, added new questions, and endorsed the proposed priority questions.
Evidence-Building Plan Priority Questions
Priority questions help the agency focus, drive planning activities, and prioritize improvements with
the greatest impact on agency programs, policies, and regulations by using evidence to make informed
decisions. Below are the NRC's priority questions for the evidence-building plan, categorized by topic.
A summary accompanies each priority question and includes the purpose of the question and the type
of evidence-building activity anticipated. For each question, the associated evidence-building activity
uses data and information to develop evidence that allows decisionmakers to make informed decisions.
Information such as status, resources, analytical approaches, and key questions will be updated for
each priority question on the Evidence-Building Activities Web page.4
Each priority question includes the following:
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches: Clearly written, actionable, and time dependent
actions the NRC will take to answer the priority questions, including the methods and analytic approaches.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools: Summary of the expected data needs and tools to answer the
priority questions. Additional data needs may emerge as the priority question is being answered.
Anticipated Challenges: Summary of challenges or obstacles that may be encountered during the
process.
Benefits: Summary of incremental and overall benefits for the agency as key actions are completed.
Priority questions are related to the strategic goals in the NRC's Strategic Plan for FYs 2022 - 2026
as
shown below.
4
The Evidence-Building Activities Web page is available at https://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/plans-performance/evidence-
building-and-evaluation/agencywide-evidence-building-activities.htm
2
Strategic Plan Goal 1 - Ensure the safe and secure use of
radioactive materials
Priority Question 1: How can the NRC improve the agency's licensing and oversight programs based
on recent operational experience and lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic?
Priority Question 2: What data received and maintained would be most beneficial for use in advanced
analytical tools (e.g., machine learning, artificial intelligence) to support NRC decisionmaking?
Priority Question 3: To what extent are the NRC's computer codes capable of supporting independent
analysis of the safety of advanced reactor designs and operations?
Strategic Plan Goal 2 - Continue to foster a healthy
organization
Priority Question 4: To what extent are licensing actions performed by the NRC becoming more or
less resource intensive over time and have there been any changes in work product quality?
Priority Question 5: To what extent are NRC's workforce planning processes adequately accommodating
potential workload fluctuations?
Priority Question 6: What process improvements can be implemented to make the NRC a more
modern, risk-informed regulator and how are they aligned with performance indicators?
Priority Question 7: How can the NRC better leverage research conducted through NRC-sponsored
university research and development grants?
Strategic Plan Goal 3 - Inspire stakeholder confidence in the
NRC
Priority Question 8: How can the NRC improve external engagement to inspire stakeholder confidence?
Priority Question 9: To what extent are the NRC's programs, policies, and activities addressing
environmental justice?
0
3
.
0
P
9.
Photo Courtesy of
Idaho National Laboratory
Priority questions for Strategic Plan Goal 1 - Ensure the safe
and secure use of radioactive materials
Priority Question 1: How can the NRC improve the
agency's licensing and oversight programs based on
recent operational experience and lessons learned from
the COVID-19 pandemic?
Summary
Gathering lessons learned and incorporating best practices from recent licensing and oversight
activities could help the NRC staff to focus on the activities most important to safety. In response
to the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, the NRC quickly identified temporary alternative
and risk-informed methods for conducting licensing and oversight activities while continuing to
provide reasonable assurance of adequate protection of public health and safety. Some of these
temporary changes could potentially streamline processes for licensing and oversight activities
in the long term while continuing to adequately protect public health and safety. The NRC will
identify lessons learned and collectively document temporary changes made to agency licensing
and oversight processes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The NRC will further analyze
these and other lessons learned to determine potential efficiencies to the agency's licensing and
oversight processes.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Complete a review of NRC licensing and oversight programs, analyzing data such as
licensing actions, exemption requests, inspections, performanceassessment enforcement,
allegations, investigations, and incident response.
2) Perform an assessment to determine what approaches to licensing and oversight were
most effective during the COVID-19 pandemic.
3) Conduct benchmarking with other Federal agencies and international nuclear regulators
in support of the assessment.
4) Assess whether modifications should be made to adjust schedules or periodicity,
streamline activities, or perform activities remotely.
5) Analyze how the licensing and inspection programs leverage technology and identify
opportunities to use technology to improve programmatic efficiency and effectiveness.
6) Identify guidance, processes, and regulations that could be modified to incorporate
improvements based on recent operational experience and lessons learned from the
COVID-19 pandemic.
a
5
.
0
0
0
P.
o.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Licensees and public stakeholder groups and organizations provided extensive communications
to the NRC during the COVID-19 pandemic related to requests for flexibility including
modifications to or exemptions from established scheduled and regulatory requirements. The
staff will use existing data and solicit new information from stakeholders, through surveys and
Federal Register notices, to support the analysis.
Anticipated Challenges
It may prove difficult to fully assess the temporary actions taken in response to the COVID-19
pandemic in a way that translates the lessons learned into potential regulatory reform, given the
unique and unprecedented challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Benefits
With respect to incremental benefits, actions that the NRC has taken during the COVID-19
pandemic can be reviewed to determine if there is a benefit to modifying the processes and
procedures in the agency's Pandemic Plan or Continuity of Operations Plan to ensure effective
and efficient plans for future emergency situations.
Priority Question 2: What data received and maintained
would be most beneficial for use in advanced analytical
tools (e.g., machine learning, artificial intelligence) to
support NRC decisionmaking?
Summary
The NRC receives information from stakeholders in various formats through mandatory and
voluntary information collections. This information is used in agency activities to support the
safety and security mission. The NRC relies heavily on individual employee analysis in the
review of items such as licensee submittals, licensing basis documents, reporting requirements,
and rulemaking activities. By improving how the NRC collects data and information, advanced
analytical tools can be used more readily and potentially make decisionmaking easier, faster, and
more efficient. Receiving data and information in formats that readily allow analysis through
modeling or calculations allows for a more effective use of resources for both the NRC and
licensees. These data improvements will also benefit members of the general public, as well as
universities performing academic research in these areas.
0
Is
6
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Identify agency information collections and conduct an analysis to determine how the
information collections as a whole support the agency's decisionmaking process and if
additional data are needed.
2) Conduct an analysis to determine which decisionmaking processes could benefit from
modifying information collections for use in advanced analytical tools.
3) Establish, through a comparative analysis, whether there is a change in burden for the
information collection using an analysis-ready submittal format.
4) Prioritize the information collections that would have the most significant impact on
agency decisionmaking, analytical tool use, and stakeholder use.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Inventory of agency activities that could benefit from improved information collections.
For each NRC information collection, the purpose of the information collection, the specific
data collected, the format, and the method of submittal to support the review.
Current resource burden for stakeholders submitting information to the NRC and estimated
resource burden for potential format and submission changes to support a comparative
analysis.
Benchmarking other agencies' use of electronic submission for information collections to
inform the NRC's review.
Anticipated Challenges
Developing universal prioritization criteria for datasets used by different program areas may
be a challenge.
Licensees that submit data to the NRC may not see the benefit in submitting in different or
more structured formats. They may not see the benefit in openly sharing data with other
stakeholders or be engaged with the NRC to provide useful feedback on implementing open
data sharing. Any potential change to the format for information submittal will need to
be examined and implemented consistent with all applicable laws, including the agency's
backfitting regulations.
0
7
0
P.
9.
Benefits
The identification of current agency information collections will assist in fulfilling the Evidence
Act requirement of developing a comprehensive data inventory and contribute to the NRC's
open data plan for datasets that can be made publicly available.
Priority Question 3: To what extent are the NRC's
computer codes capable of supporting independent
analysis of the safety of advanced reactor designs and
operations?
Summary
The NRC routinely uses scientific computer codes and analytical tools to perform confirmatory,
sensitivity, and uncertainty analyses to independently analyze the safety of advanced
reactor designs. These codes and tools help examine safety margins inherent in the design,
commensurate with the risk and safety significance of the phenomena related to specific
reactor designs. The NRC will perform analysis and research to (1) identify the computer codes,
analytical tools, information, and data for reactor-systems-analysis that the staff may need to
analyze the safety of non-light water reactor (non-LWR) designs, (2) assess the existing capability
of computer codes, analytical tools, and supporting information, (3) identify gaps in both
analytical capabilities and supporting information and data, and (4) interact with both domestic
and international organizations working on non-LWR technologies to enhance collaboration
and cooperation. The NRC will engage stakeholders including the U.S. Department of Energy,
the Electric Power Research Institute, the national laboratories, reactor vendors, utilities, and
the international community on issues related to computer codes and analytical tools, to share
knowledge and collaborate on solutions.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Identify, through a needs assessment, near-term advanced reactor submittals to
understand which systems and components will need to be modeled and assessed using
computer codes and analytical tools.
2) Identify, through a needs assessment, the computer codes, analytical tools, information,
and data for reactor-systems-analysis that the staff may need to analyze the safety of non-
LWR designs.
3) Review near-term advanced reactor submittals to identify unique features and areas of
interest, group and prioritize designs by technology type, and determine the computer
codes and data needed to perform the safety analyses for each reactor design.
8
4) Assess the existing capability of computer codes, analytical tools, and supporting
information and identify gaps in analytical capabilities and data (e.g., areas of large
uncertainties relative to key safety limits or the operation of novel reactor design
features).
5) Interact with both domestic and international organizations working on non-LWR
technologies to identify opportunities to collaborate and cooperate in recognizing and
closing gaps.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
List of near-term advanced reactor designs to support the review.
Operational and experimental data used to develop advanced reactors (e.g., normal
operation, transient information, basic physics data) to support the review.
Anticipated Challenges
The staff may not have access to advanced reactor design information prior to formal
licensing and topical report submittals.
There may be limited access to information, models, and data for those non-LWR designs
that are less mature, with designs that are currently conceptual in nature and lack the details
to allow for a full understanding of the reactor design and its operations.
Benefits
These activities will increase the NRC's overall capacity to perform modeling and simulation.
Through these activities, the NRC staff will gain early familiarity with new reactor designs
and have a better understanding of the limits of modeling and simulation in comparison to
actual results.
Establishing the agency's baseline capabilities for computer code modeling will allow the NRC
to identify additional research that will increase the capabilities of the agency's computer
codes and analytical tools.
Completing these evidence-building activities will give the NRC an understanding of the
extent to which its computer codes for reactor systems analysis and analytical tools can be
used to evaluate the safety of non-LWR designs.
9
0
P
of
Priority Questions for Strategic Plan Goal 2-Continue to
foster a healthy organization
Priority Question 4: To what extent are licensing actions
performed by the NRC becoming more or less resource
intensive over time and have there been any changes in
work product quality?
Summary
Data-drivenandevidence-basedlicense reviews are essential to ensuring the NRCi isaccomplishing
its mission. To answer this question, the NRC will evaluate licensing actions associated with
licensing programs for which the NRC has developed generic milestone schedules, as required
by the Nuclear Energy Innovation and Modernization Act (NEIMA).5 The evaluation will (1)
determine if similar licensing actions have become more or less resource-intensive over time; (2)
identify resource variances between similar licensing actions; (3) identify the factors contributing
to the increase, decrease, and variance of resources for each type of licensing action; and (4)
determine if there were any changes to the quality of the work products. The NRC will engage
internal and external stakeholders to conduct this assessment. This evaluation will produce a
better understanding of how resources are being used for similar licensing actions and may
provide key insights to further risk-inform the agency's licensing programs.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Complete a process evaluation of licensing actions to determine if resource needs have
become more or less extensive over time. The evaluation will use a combination of
methods that include a comparative analysis, trend analysis, quality assessment, and a
needs assessment.
2) Assess which factors contributed to the increase or decrease of resource needs for each
type of licensing action.
3) Conduct a quality assessment of work products associated with licensing actions.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Financial information from the license application reviews to establish a baseline level of
effort for license reviews.
Quality assessment documentation for license application reviews.
5
The NRC established generic milestone schedules for different types of licensing actions for requested activities of the
Commission that involve the issuance of a final safety evaluation as required by Section 102(c) of NEIMA. (Pub. L. No.
115-439, tit I, § 102(c), 132 Stat. 5570 (2019)). The NRC's generic milestone schedules can be found on the Web site at
https://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/generic-schedules.htm
0
10
0
Categorized licensing actions to assess the different types of reviews to support comparative
analysis.
Product quality surveys completed by internal and external stakeholders to contribute to
establishing the quality baseline.
Prior related evaluation and audit reports by the NRC and other Government organizations.
Anticipated Challenges
Not all available data are at the level of detail or quality the NRC requires to perform an
accurate evaluation.
Earlier financial data are not necessarily in the same format as later data; data inconsistencies
and formatting do not allow for ease of processing and evaluation or for comparison and
analysis over longer periods of time.
Licensing actions may be heterogeneous to a degree that inhibits comparisons.
Benefits
Establishing baseline data points for staff and contract effort expended on license reviews
for similar licensing actions will help with future workforce planning projections.
Identifying and assessing the quality of requests for additional information from licensees
can be useful in enhancing the quality of regulatory guidance.
Developing a quality baseline with defined criteria for assessing licensing work products will
help the NRC consistently measure quality in the future.
Priority Question 5: To what extent are NRC's workforce
planning processes adequately accommodating potential
workload fluctuations?
Summary
The goal of Strategic Workforce Planning (SWP) is to formulate strategies and action plans that
enable the NRC to recruit, retain, and develop the workforce required to address emerging
needs and workload fluctuations. The SWP process supports agency efforts to better forecast
the amount and type of work now and in the future, and the workforce needed to perform
this work. The SWP process also helps staff understand the future direction of the agency's
work and empowers staff to plan their professional career development. The NRC will perform
an evaluation that assesses the effectiveness and efficiency of the current SWP processes and
will compare estimated workloads and staffing projections against actual results. The NRC will
engage with internal stakeholders using the SWP process and benchmark against other Federal
agencies.
0
0
11
.
0
e
0
0
0
P.
9.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Conduct an evaluation for the SWP process to assess effectiveness and efficiency, as well
as identify areas for improvement, if any, to maximize the agency's efforts. Conducting a
formative evaluation of the NRC's SWP process will require the agency to comprehensively
assess multiple aspects of the overall approach to workforce planning as implemented
on an agencywide basis. The formative evaluation will use a combination of methods
that include an implementation assessment and a needs assessment. This evaluation will
inform a subsequent outcome-focused evaluation to assess the cost-effectiveness of the
SWP process. This evaluation will determine whether the workforce planning process
a) results in dependable future workload projections; and
b) is effective and efficient in light of the accuracy of the workload projections.
2) Conduct benchmarking with other Federal agencies.
3) Perform an analysis to determine whether the cost of conducting the SWP process is
effectively balanced against the desired outcomes.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Compatible data for projected and actual workloads to support the comparative analysis.
Documentation of the processes used to develop the projected workloads.
Prior related evaluations and assessments of workforce needs as performed by the NRC and
by external organizations.
Data from interviews and focus groups to support the evaluation.
Anticipated Challenges
Resources expended by staff and management to support the SWP process may be aggregated
and tracked with other generic administrative activities. Resources may need to be estimated
based on discussions with staff and management.
Benefits
With respect to incremental benefits, assessing the efficiency of the actual workforce planning
and its comparison to projections, as well as benchmarking with other Federal agencies, will
provide the NRC with insights to improve in workforce planning, recruiting, and retention
practices that the agency can leverage in its internal workforce planning program.
Is
12
Priority Question 6: What process improvements can
be implemented to make the NRC a more modern,
risk-informed regulator and how are they aligned with
performance indicators?
Summary
Processes and procedures are vital to ensure consistency, clear expectations, performance
measurement, and established roles and responsibilities consistent with established policy.
The NRC operates with structured processes and procedures, such as management directives
and office instructions. The NRC uses a performance management framework that clearly
and directly links program goals with the NRC Strategic Plan and institutionalizes the use of
performance information in decisionmaking. These processes and procedures and the NRC's
performance management framework will move the agency toward being a more modern, risk-
informed regulator.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Identify and prioritize agency processes based on the level of potential improvement or
benefit to the agency, measured by frequency of use and level of effort, while factoring in
potential risks (e.g., loss of transparency, reduced stakeholder engagement).
2) Identify agencywide process gaps that could be improved or benefit from procedure
development using business analytics.
3) Conduct a process evaluation to determine which processes are not working as intended
or can be further improved or enhanced for effectiveness, efficiency, quality, and agility.
4) Analyze the agency's performance indicators to determine if they-
a) provide meaningful outcomes;
b) provide a hierarchical structure that allows consistent reporting; and
c) should be discontinued, modified, or replaced with new performance indicators
that provide more meaningful results.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Documentation of the processes and procedures within the agency, to ensure that the
prioritization for process improvement encompasses all agency processes and procedures.
Baseline of current process effectiveness and efficiency related to time, quality, resources,
and level of staff and management effort, to use in a comparative analysis.
Feedback from internal and external stakeholders on the NRC's processes and procedures
to inform the evaluation.
0
13
.
0
0
0
P
9.
Performance indicator data including results and their relationship to office and agency
priorities, and their importance or relevance to internal and external stakeholders, to inform
the evaluation.
Documented process and structure for discontinuing, modifying, or replacing performance
indicators.
Feedback from internal and external stakeholders on the performance indicators to support
establishment of a baseline.
Anticipated Challenges
The staff may be challenged to establish the baseline of current process effectiveness and
efficiency in order to measure quality and level of effort.
It may be difficult to secure subject matter expertise in performance management to perform
an objective assessment of the agency's performance indicators.
There may be resistance to discontinuing, modifying, or replacing performance indicators
with indicators that provide more meaningful results.
Benefits
Process mapping will result in a fully documented end-to-end process flow and may facilitate
the identification of processes that could benefit from an automated workflow.
Identifying and mapping processes will give staff a holistic view of processes, which will allow
them to clearly identify duplication and ensure consistency between overlapping processes.
Priority Question 7: How can the NRC better leverage
research conducted through NRC-sponsored university
research and development grants?
Summary
The NRC's University Nuclear Leadership Program awards funding to universities for research
and development (R&D) grants. The program is intended to develop a workforce capable of
supporting the design, construction, operation, and regulation of nuclear facilities and the
safe handling of nuclear materials. The NRC will evaluate the University Nuclear Leadership
Program to identify opportunities to leverage university grants to support NRC research needs.
The evaluation will include activities such as internal and external stakeholder engagement,
process reviews, and benchmarking with other Federal agencies. Ideally, the evaluation will
reveal strategies for more effective use of research funding in the future.
14
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Conduct a formative evaluation to assess effectiveness and efficiency, as well as identify
areas for improvement, if any, to maximize the agency's efforts. The evaluation will
determine the extent to which:
a) The University Nuclear Leadership Program is achieving the intended benefits for
the NRC's workforce development and research needs.
b) Current processes for awarding funding are effective and efficient in meeting the
program objectives.
c)
Improvements to the program can be made to better leverage the NRC-sponsored
research and development grants.
2) Conduct an analysis that identifies the University Nuclear Leadership Program's effect on
universities and the nuclear industry.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Qualitative and quantitative data associated with effects on universities and the nuclear
industry (e.g., job creation, academic interest) as a result of the University Nuclear Leadership
Program.
Benchmarking information from other Federal agencies on their grant programs, award
criteria, and agency benefits, to support a comparative analysis.
Anticipated Challenges
Because the R&D grant program is relatively new, sufficient data may not be readily available.
Benefits
Sharing and publicizing the NRC funded R&D grants will allow NRC stakeholders to leverage
the outcomes of the research projects.
Determining if the NRC's grant program is achieving its workforce development objectives
will help the agency make continuation or modification decisions.
Benchmarking University Nuclear Leadership Program grant practices with other Federal
agencies will provide the NRC with insights on whether it needs to modify its grant programs.
0
15
.
0
P
9.
Priority Questions for Strategic Plan Goal 3 - Inspire
stakeholder confidence in the NRC
Priority Question 8: How can the NRC improve external
engagement to inspire stakeholder confidence?
Summary
The NRC takes an active role in the Open Government Initiative by ensuring that the public
is informed about and has a reasonable opportunity to meaningfully participate in the NRC's
regulatory processes. The NRC will assess the agency's current practices for external engagement
to determine the effectiveness of these methods and to establish a baseline for stakeholder
confidence. The assessment will include reviewing readily available information, such as
results of the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey and Safety Culture and Climate Survey, public
comments on rulemakings and policy statements, participation in public meetings, engagement
in social media platforms, and inquiries received through the NRC public Web page. The NRC
will conduct an analysis that accounts for equity, diversity, and inclusion; identifies areas for
improvement; and develops recommendations to inspire stakeholder confidence in areas where
it may be lacking.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Identify and assess the current methods of communication with stakeholders in terms
of frequency, type of communication, and how engaged the stakeholders are in the
communication.
2) Research engagement practices in industry and government that are associated with
high stakeholder confidence, and conduct a comparative analysis with NRC engagement
practices.
3) Identify and assess communications with stakeholders, including NRC documents released
to the public and information shared on the NRC public Web page.
4) Conduct benchmarking with other Federal agencies on their engagement with
stakeholders.
5) Survey NRC stakeholders to determine a baseline for stakeholder confidence in the
agency's current methods of engaging with the public.
0
Is
16
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Documentation and data associated with previous surveys that measured openness to
support the review and contribute to establishing a baseline for stakeholder confidence in
the NRC's commitment to public engagement and methods for engaging with the public.
Information on public meetings, both in person and virtual, including the number of
attendees, grouped by topic area, to support the review.
Sample set of written and verbal communications, including social media communications,
for benchmarking.
Statistics from visitors to the NRC public Web site and social media platforms such as site
visitors, searches, and followers.
Results of existing surveys related to public confidence in Federal agencies (and the basis for
such results), to support the review and benchmarking analysis.
Anticipated Challenges
The staff may be challenged by difficulty in identifying the appropriate groups of stakeholders to
survey and by the need to develop multiple surveys for different groups.
Benefits
As an incremental benefit, the staff can gain insights into the perspectives of different groups
of stakeholders at different locations and identify key reasons for the lack of confidence of
each location's stakeholders in the NRC's commitment to public engagement and methods for
engaging with the public. This information can be used to improve engagement and practices
for future communications with each stakeholder group.
Priority Question 9: To what extent are the NRC's
programs, policies, and activities addressing
environmental justice?
Summary
Executive Order (EO) 12898, "Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority
Populations and Low-Income Populations," dated February 11, 1994, states that Federal agencies
"shall make achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying and addressing, as
appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of
its programs, policies, and activities on minority and low-income populations. " Independent
agencies, such as the NRC, are not bound by the terms of the EO, but, as stated in the order,
0
17
.
0
0
0
P
9.
are requested to comply with its provisions. The Commission has committed to the general
goals of the EO. In its "Policy Statement on the Treatment of Environmental Justice Matters in
NRC Regulatory and Licensing Actions" (69 FR 52040; August 4, 2004), the Commission stated
that the NRC will consider and integrate environmental justice matters as part of its National
Environmental Policy Act review process.
The NRC will systematically review how the agency's programs, policies, and activities address
environmental justice. As part of its review, the staff will evaluate recent EOs and assess whether
environmental justice is appropriately considered and addressed in the agency's programs,
policies, and activities, such as adjudicatory procedures and environmental reviews, given the
agency's mission. The NRC will benchmark practices of other Federal, State, and Tribal agencies
and assess whether the NRC should incorporate environmental justice beyond implementation
through the National Environmental Policy Act. The NRC will review the adequacy of the 2004
"Policy Statement on the Treatment of Environmental Justice Matters in NRC Regulatory and
Licensing Actions." The NRC staff will also consider whether establishing formal mechanisms
to gather external stakeholder input would benefit any future environmental justice efforts.
The NRC will engage with internal and external stakeholders representing a broad range of
perspectives to solicit their views. The staff will leverage institutional knowledge and use NRC
transformation initiatives, where practicable, to inform the review.
Key Actions, Methods, and Analytic Approaches
1) Assess how agency programs, policies, and activities address environmental justice, and
compare them to EOs or other Executive Branch activities that discuss environmental
justice, as appropriate.
2) Benchmark NRC environmenta justice activities against the environmental justice activities
of other Government agencies.
3) Analyze the legal or other limits of applying environmental justice concepts to additional
aspects of the agency's programs, policies, and activities.
4) Identify potential formal mechanisms to gather input from external stakeholders and
other interested persons and determine whether these formal mechanism(s) could be
improved through any future NRC environmental justice efforts.
Anticipated Data Needs and Tools
Compilation of environmental justice benchmarking information to help draw comparisons
and distinctions.
Documentation of interagency coordination efforts and compilation of existing guidance to
agencies for implementing environmental justice programs.
0
Is
18
Development of a resource comparing and outlining goals of EOs that address environmental
justice (e.g., EO 14008, "Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad," dated January 27,
2021) against which to assess agency programs, policies, and activities, as appropriate.
Compilation of examples of formal environmental justice mechanism(s) from Federal, State,
and Tribal agencies.
Collection and compilation of the views of, and information from, stakeholders and other
interested persons.
Anticipated Challenges
The staff may be challenged in (1) determining the appropriate depth and breadth of agency
programs, policies, and activities to review, (2) consistently determining and quantifying
potential benefits and impacts (concrete quantitative information will likely be difficult to find),
and (3) dispositioning or reconciling conflicting feedback from stakeholders and other interested
persons.
Benefits
Carrying out the activities above and developing a better understanding of considerations for
the social-economic demographics around NRC-licensed facilities will allow the NRC to better
engage minority and low-income communities.
ERALY its SELECTRIC
Photo Courtesy of
University of Wisconsin-Madison
010
WERTA
the
A
GLEKIA
4mm
045
67
VIXI
MY
NRC FORM 335
U.S. NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
1. REPORT NUMBER
(12-2010)
(Assigned by NRC, Add Vol., Supp., Rev.,
NRCMD 3.7
and Addendum Numbers, if any.)
BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA SHEET
NUREG 2252, Volume 1
(See instructions on the reverse)
2. TITLE AND SUBTITLE
3. DATE REPORT PUBLISHED
Evidence Building Plan Fiscal Year 2022
MONTH
YEAR
April
2022
4. FIN OR GRANT NUMBER
N/A
5. AUTHOR(S)
6. TYPE OF REPORT
Matthew Meyer, Angela Randall, et. al.
Evidence Building Plan
7. PERIOD COVERED (Inclusive Dates)
Annual
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION - NAME AND ADDRESS (If NRC, provide Division, Office or Region, U. S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and mailing address; if
contractor, provide name and mailing address.)
Office of the Executive Director for Operations
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Washington, DC 20555-001
9. SPONSORING ORGANIZATION - NAME AND ADDRESS (If NRC, type "Same as above", if contractor, provide NRC Division, Office or Region, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, and mailing address.)
Same as above
10. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
11. ABSTRACT (200 words or less)
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC or the agency) is an independent agency established by the Energy
Reorganization Act of 1974, which began operations in 1975 as a successor to the Atomic Energy Commission. The NRC is
required by the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 to develop an agency evidence-building plan. An
evidence-building plan is a systematic approach for identifying and addressing priority questions relevant to the agency's
programs, policies, and regulations. More broadly, it is a coordination tool to engage stakeholders in evidence planning and
building to help achieve an agency's mission. The evidence-building plan is intended to emphasize and foster an agency culture of
learning and continuous improvement. Once an evidence-building plan is implemented, decisionmakers can use the resulting
evidence to guide choices to improve the agency programs, policies, and regulations. The evidence-building plan
includes
nine
priority questions to support agency needs and the fiscal years 2022 - 2026 strategic goals and objectives.
12. KEY WORDS/DESCRIPTORS (List words or phrases that will assist researchers in locating the report.)
13. AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
unlimited
Evidence, Evidence-Based, Policymaking, Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Evidence Act, evidence-
building plan, strategic plan, strategic planning, evidence-building, priority questions, decisionmakers, continuous improvement,
14. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
improvement
(This Page)
unclassified
(This Report)
unclassified
15. NUMBER OF PAGES
16. PRICE
NRC FORM 335 (12-2010)
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NUREG-2252, Vol. 1
April 2022
www.nrc.gov
STAY CONNECTED
f
You
Tube
oo
in
@NRCgov
