U.S. GOVERNMENT
ITHENTICATED
INFORMATION
GPO
29683
Rules and Regulations
Federal Register
Vol. 86, No. 105
Thursday, June 3, 2021
This section of the FEDERAL REGISTER
INFORMATION CONTACT section of this
primary function of this position.3 The
contains regulatory documents having general
document.
agency evaluation policy "should guide
applicability and legal effect, most of which
NRC's Agencywide Documents
the agency's activities throughout the
are keyed to and codified in the Code of
Access and Management System
evaluation lifecycle." 4 The Office of
Federal Regulations, which is published under
(ADAMS): You may obtain publicly-
Management and Budget (OMB) has
50 titles pursuant to 44 U.S.C. 1510.
available documents online in the
provided guidance on establishing an
The Code of Federal Regulations is sold by
ADAMS Public Documents collection at
agency evaluation policy based on
the Superintendent of Documents.
https://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/
"approaches that Federal agencies have
adams.html To begin the search, select
found useful. This guidance includes
"Begin Web-based ADAMS Search." For
"[e]nsuring that the agency evaluation
NUCLEAR REGULATORY
problems with ADAMS, please contact
policy incorporates the evaluation
COMMISSION
the NRC's Public Document Room (PDR)
standards" recommended by OMB.
10 CFR Chapter I
reference staff at 1-800-397-4209, at
OMB developed these evaluation
301-415-4737, or by email to
standards through an interagency
[NRC-2020-0262]
pdr.resource@nrc.gov. The final
council that "reviewed an extensive list
Evidence-Building and Evaluation
of source documents to identify widely
Evidence-Building and Evaluation
Policy Statement, in its entirety, is in
accepted standards for evaluation."
Policy Statement
the attachment to this document.
The interagency council identified the
Attention: The PDR, where you may
following evaluation standards:
AGENCY: Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
examine and order copies of public
relevance and utility, rigor,
ACTION: Policy statement; issuance.
documents is currently closed. You may
independence and objectivity,
submit your request to the PDR via
transparency, and ethics.
email at PDR.Resource@nrc.gov or call
The Evidence Act focuses on the
SUMMARY: The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
1-800-397-4209 between 8:00 a.m. and
importance of sound evidence-building,
Commission (NRC) is issuing an
Evidence-Building and Evaluation
4:00 p.m. (EST), Monday through
which includes evaluation, to make
Policy Statement that describes the
Friday, except Federal holidays.
informed evidence-based decisions. The
evaluation standards developed by the
general standards that guide the NRC's
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
interagency council, including an
"evidence-building" activities,
Matthew Meyer, Office of the Executive
consistent with the Foundations for
additional standard developed by the
Director for Operations, U.S. Nuclear
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
NRC (collaboration), are applicable to
Regulatory Commission, Washington,
all of the NRC's evidence-building
2018. The policy statement is intended
DC 20555-0001, telephone: 301-415-
activities.
to provide agency personnel and
6198, email: Matthew.Meyer@nrc.gov.
Historically, the NRC has relied on
stakeholders with a clear understanding
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
high-quality evidence obtained from
of the expectations related to the NRC's
external entities and through its own
standards for evidence-building
I. Background
capacity. In recent years the agency has
activities, which includes analyses,
The Foundations for Evidence-Based
begun evidence-building activities to
research, assessments, and evaluations
Policymaking Act of 2018 ("Evidence
support licensing new or novel nuclear
performed by the agency for
Act") became law on January 14, 2019
technologies, including advanced, non-
programmatic, operational, regulatory,
(Pub. L. 115-435), to enhance evidence-
light water reactor designs; accident
and policy decision making. These
building activities, make data more
tolerant nuclear fuel; and digital
standards include rigor, relevance and
accessible, and strengthen privacy
instrumentation and controls.9
utility, transparency, collaboration,
protections.ยน "[T]he Evidence Act
Additionally, the NRC has increasingly
independence and objectivity, and
creates a new paradigm by calling on
sought to rely on evidence-based
ethics.
agencies to significantly rethink how
metrics to improve internal agency
DATES: This policy statement is effective
they currently plan and organize
performance including budgeting and
on June 3, 2021.
evidence-building, data management,
financial management. 10 The NRC has
ADDRESSES: Please refer to Docket ID
and data access functions to ensure an
developed an evidence-building and
NRC-2020-0262 when contacting the
integrated and direct connection to data
evaluation policy statement to enhance
NRC about the availability of
and evidence needs.' 2 The Evidence
its existing evidence-building activities
information for this action. You may
Act requires each agency to name an
obtain publicly-available information
Evaluation Officer. At the NRC, the
35 U.S.C. 313(d)(3).
related to this action by any of the
Director of the Office of Nuclear
4 Office of Management and Budget, M-20-12,
following methods:
Regulatory Research holds this position
"Phase 4 Implementation of the Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018: Program
Federal Rulemaking Website: Go to
and must "establish and implement an
Evaluation Standards and Practices," Appendix C
https://www.regulations.gov and search
agency evaluation policy" to fulfill a
(March 10, 2020) (M-20-12).
for Docket ID NRC-2020-0262. Address
5 M-20-12, Appendix C.
questions about NRC dockets to Dawn
1 Public Law 115-435, 132 Stat 5529 (2019).
6 Id.
Forder; telephone: 301-415-3407;
2 Office of Management and Budget, M-19-23,
7 Id. at 2.
email: Dawn.Forder@nrc.gov. For
"Phase 1 Implementation of the Foundations for
8 Id. at 3-5.
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018: Learning
9 Nuclear Regulatory Commission, NUREG-1350
technical questions contact the
Agendas, Personnel, and Planning Guidance," 2
2019-2020 Information Digest, at 4 (August 2019).
individual listed in the FOR FURTHER
(July 10, 2019).
10 Id. at 7.
29684
Federal Register/ 86, No. 105 / Thursday, June 3, 2021/Rules and Regulations
through the activities directed in the
Dated: May 28, 2021.
The NRC's Principles of Good
Evidence Act. The NRC envisions that
For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Regulation, which include
this approach will strengthen the
Wesley W. Held,
independence, efficiency, clarity,
agency's oversight of existing uses of
Acting Secretary of the Commission.
reliability, and openness, have guided
nuclear technology, enhance the
the agency's regulatory activities and
agency's readiness to license and
Note: The following attachment will not
decisions using evidence and scientific
regulate new and novel nuclear
appear in the Code of Federal Regulations:
methods. The principles focus on
technologies, and further the NRC's
meeting the agency's important safety
ongoing efforts to improve its internal
Attachment-Evidence-Building and
and security mission while
Evaluation Policy Statement
processes.
appropriately considering the interests
The purpose of this Evidence-
of stakeholders, including licensees;
II. Public Comments
Building and Evaluation Policy
State, local, and Tribal governments;
The NRC published the Proposed
Statement is to describe the general
nongovernmental organizations; and the
Evaluation Policy Statement in the
standards that govern the NRC's
public. The agency's openness principle
Federal Register for a 30-day comment
planning and conduct of evidence-
explicitly recognizes that the public
period on December 8, 2020 (85 FR
building. Evidence-building includes
must be informed about and have an
79042). The NRC received a total of nine
activities such as analysis, assessment,
opportunity to participate in the
public comments.
research, and program evaluation
regulatory process.
These comments were generally
(evaluation). 11 The Foundations for
Evidence-building is used to inform
supportive of the policy statement and
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
agency activities and actions, such as
the NRC's commitment to ensuring that
2018 requires an agency evaluation
licensing, oversight, budgeting, program
its regulatory decisions are supported
policy to guide the agency's evaluation
improvement, accountability,
with evidence and sound technical
activities throughout the evaluation
management, rulemaking, guidance
bases. However, commenters also
lifecycle. The NRC is committed to
development, and policy development.
requested that the NRC clarify the
using evidence and scientific methods
The emphasis on evidence is meant to
applicability of the policy statement to
when making evidence-based decisions.
support innovation, improvement, and
evidence-building activities other than
The NRC is an evidence-based
learning. Examples of how the NRC
"evaluation" as that term is defined in
organization with a culture of
carries out evidence-building include
the Evidence Act (5 U.S.C. 311(3)), such
continuous learning and improvement.
(1) identifying, evaluating, and resolving
as licensing, inspection, rulemaking,
The NRC's evidence-building activities
safety issues; (2) ensuring that an
generic communication, and other
use objective technical analyses and
independent technical basis exists to
regulatory activities (including
assessments to document decisions with
review licensee submittals; (3)
backfitting analyses, and environmental
explicitly stated rationale. Furthermore,
evaluating operating experience and
reviews performed under the National
the NRC commits to implementing the
results of risk assessments for safety
Environmental Policy Act). The NRC
standards of rigor; relevance and utility;
implications; (4) supporting the
agrees and has revised the proposed
transparency; collaboration;
development and use of risk-informed
policy statement to clarify that the
independence and objectivity; and
regulatory approaches; (5) conducting
general standards articulated in the
ethics in the conduct of its evidence-
research with scientific integrity; and (6)
policy statement apply to all agency
building activities. This policy
ensuring that licensing and oversight
*evidence-building" activities. This
statement describes these general
findings are supported by evidence.
includes not only "evaluations"
standards.
Evidence-Building Standards
conducted to review the effectiveness
The Commission, as a collegial body,
The NRC uses the following standards
and efficiency of NRC programs,
formulates policies, develops
policies, and organizations, but other
when conducting evidence-building
regulations governing nuclear reactor
activities.
types of evidence-building such as
and nuclear material safety, issues
1. Rigor-The NRC is committed to
regulatory analyses, compliance
orders to licensees, and adjudicates
using rigorous evidence-building
analyses, and performance assessments.
legal matters. The collegial decision-
methods by qualified staff with relevant
A complete table of the comments
making process results in actions
education, skills, and experience to
received on the proposed policy
reflecting the collective judgment of a
ensure findings are appropriate and
statement and NRC staff responses to
group aided by professional and
feasible within statutory, budgetary, and
those comments is available in ADAMS
administrative staff and advisory
other constraints.
under Accession No. ML21070A196.
committees, such as the Advisory
Rigorous evidence-building requires
III. Procedural Requirements
Committee on Reactor Safeguards. Strict
inferences about cause and effect to be
requirements govern the admission and
well founded (internal validity); clarity
Congressional Review Act
consideration of "evidence" when the
about the populations, settings, or
This policy statement is not a rule as
Commission acts in its adjudicatory
circumstances to which results can be
defined in the Congressional Review
capacity. This policy applies to the
generalized (external validity); and the
Act (5 U.S.C. 801-808).
NRC's non-adjudicatory functions.12
use of measures that accurately capture
the intended information (measurement
Paperwork Reduction Act
11 The Evidence Act defines "evaluation" as "an
reliability and validity). The NRC's
This Policy Statement does not
assessment using systematic data collection and
evidence-building activities are
contain new or amended information
analysis of one or more programs, policies, and
organizations intended to assess their effectiveness
conducted by qualified staff with
collection requirements and, therefore,
and efficiency" (5 U.S.C. 311(3)). "Evaluation can
relevant education, skills, and
is not subject to the Paperwork
look beyond the program, policy, or organizational
experience for the methods undertaken.
Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501
level to include assessment of projects or
The NRC's evidence-building activities
et seq.).
interventions within a program" (OMB M-20-12).
The NRC's rules of practice and procedure in
use appropriate designs and methods
The text of the Evidence-Building and
10 CFR part 2 govern the Commission's
that adhere to widely accepted scientific
Evaluation Policy statement is attached.
adjudicatory process.
principles to answer key questions
Federal Register/ Vol. 86, No. 105 /Thursday, June 3, 2021 /Rules and Regulations
29685
while balancing goals, scale, timeline,
thinking, creative problem solving,
BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL
feasibility, and available resources.
unbiased findings, and honest feedback.
PROTECTION
Additionally, the NRC's Information
The NRC emphasizes trust, respect, and
open communication to promote a
12 CFR Part 1026
Quality Program 13 ensures that all
information relied on by the NRC is
positive work environment that
subject to rigorous quality standards.
maximizes the potential of all
[Docket No. CFPB-2020-0023]
2. Relevance and Utility-The NRC
individuals, which improves evidence
RIN 3170-AA83
ensures that evidence-building activities
building and evaluation activities. A
are relevant and provide useful findings
collaborative environment leverages
Higher-Priced Mortgage Loan Escrow
to inform agency activities, actions, and
expertise from subject matter experts
Exemption (Regulation Z); Correcting
stakeholders.
and enables peer reviews to ensure
Amendments
The NRC performs evidence-building
rigorous evidence-building. The NRC
activities to examine questions of
conducts research and collaborates with
AGENCY: Bureau of Consumer Financial
importance and serve the information
organizations that develop consensus
Protection.
needs of stakeholders. The NRC
standards to improve data and methods
ACTION: Final rule; official
presents findings that are clear, concise,
used in risk analysis. The NRC
interpretations; correcting amendments.
actionable, and available within a
collaborates with national laboratories,
SUMMARY: This document corrects the
timeline that is appropriate to the
Agreement States, other Federal
Official Interpretations (Commentary) to
questions under consideration. The
agencies, universities, and international
NRC's evidence-building priorities
Regulation z. Specifically, the Bureau of
organizations.
Consumer Financial Protection (Bureau)
consider legislative requirements; the
5. Independence and Objectivity-As
NRC's strategic goals, objectives, and
is adding a comment to its Commentary
strategies; and the interests and views of
an independent Federal agency, the
that it included in a recent higher-
NRC is committed to conducting
stakeholders.
priced mortgage loan escrow exemption
3. Transparency-The NRC is
evidence-building activities that are
final rule but that was not incorporated
committed to conducting evidence-
independent and based on objective
into the Code of Federal Regulations
building activities in an open and
assessments and analysis of all relevant
(CFR) due to an omission in an
transparent manner, which keeps
information.
amendatory instruction. The Bureau is
stakeholders informed.
The NRC was established as an
also revising a comment that it included
The NRC's evidence-building
independent agency to regulate civilian
in the same recent final rule, but that
activities are conducted openly and the
uses of radioactive material. The NRC's
inadvertently did not appear in a
public must be informed about and have
evidence-building activities are
subsequently effective final rule.
an opportunity to participate in the
independent and objective to maintain
DATES: The corrections are effective on
NRC's regulatory process. As a
credibility and integrity. The
June 3, 2021.
regulator, the NRC listens to, respects,
implementation of evidence-building
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
and analyzes different views from its
activities, including the selection and
Joseph Devlin, Senior Counsel, Office of
stakeholders. The NRC ensures open
assignment of the staff, should be
Regulations, at 202-435-7700 or https://
channels of communication are
appropriately insulated from factors that
reginquiries.consumerfinance.gov/.If
maintained between internal and
may affect objectivity, impartiality, and
you require this document in an
external stakeholders, including
professional judgment. Evidence-
alternative electronic format, please
Congress, other government agencies,
building is inclusive and the NRC seeks
contact CFPB_Accessibility@cfpb.gov.
licensees, nongovernmental
input from a broad range of stakeholders
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
organizations, individual members of
in setting priorities, identifying
the public, and international and
questions, and assessing the
I. Background
domestic nuclear communities. The
implications of findings. The NRC
The Bureau is issuing this document
NRC takes reasonable measures to make
strives for objectivity in the planning
to correct two comments in the Bureau's
all information, including information
and conduct of evidence-building
Commentary to Regulation Z, which
about the NRC's evidence-building
activities.
implements the Truth in Lending Act.ยน
activities (including their purpose,
6. Ethics-The NRC is committed to
In the final rule titled "Higher-Priced
objectives, design, findings, and
conducting evidence-building activities
Mortgage Loan Escrow Exemption
methods), broadly available and
that adhere to Government-wide ethics
(Regulation Z)" (Escrow Exemption
accessible. The NRC releases public
standards to protect the public and
Final Rule), published in the Federal
evidence-building findings in a timely
maintain public trust.
Register on February 17, 2021 (86 FR
manner and archives the data for
The NRC's evidence-building
9840), the Bureau included Paragraph
secondary use by stakeholders, as
activities comply with relevant legal
35(b)(2)(vi)(B) in its commentary text for
appropriate.
4. Collaboration-The NRC is
requirements and are conducted in a
the rule, but omitted the related
manner that is free from conflicts of
committed to working collaboratively
amendatory instruction to add that
interest, undue influence, the
specific paragraph to the Commentary.
when conducting evidence-building
activities and draws on the expertise of
appearance of bias, and safeguards the
This omission was a scrivener's error.
dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of
The Bureau is therefore issuing this
subject matter experts to ensure
participants. The NRC complies with
correction to ensure that Paragraph
diversity in perspectives.
The NRC fosters a collaborative work
Governmentwide ethics standards
35(b)(2)(vi)(B) is incorporated into the
environment that encourages diverse
contained in Federal statutes and
Commentary published in the CFR.
views, alternative approaches, critical
regulations, which are intended to
Additionally, the Bureau is amending
ensure that every citizen can have
the CFR to revise a comment that the
13 Management Directive 3.17, "Information
confidence in the integrity of the
Bureau amended in the Escrow
Quality Program," ensures that peer review is
Federal Government.
Exemption Rule but that inadvertently
conducted on all influential scientific information
[FR Doc. 2021-11637 Filed 6-2-21; 8:45 am]
and highly influential scientific assessment that the
BILLING CODE 7590-01-P
1 15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.
agency intends to disseminate.
