O
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
AGENCY EQUITY ACTION PLAN
SUBMITTED TO THE DOMESTIC POLICY COUNCIL AND
THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
National
NSF
Science
Foundation
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The National Science Foundation (NSF) is an independent federal agency created by Congress in
1950 "to promote the progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare; to secure the national defense. NSF supports all fields of science and engineering that
create knowledge that transforms the future. This type of support:
Is a primary driver of the U.S. economy;
Enhances the nation's security; and
Advances knowledge to sustain global leadership.
With an annual budget of $8.5 billion (FY 2021), NSF is the funding source for approximately
25 percent of all federally supported basic research conducted by America's colleges and
universities. NSF invests in all 50 states and US territories through grants to nearly 2,000
colleges, universities, and institutions. Each year, NSF receives more than 40,000 competitive
proposals and makes about 10,000 new awards. Those awards include support for cooperative
research with industry, Arctic and Antarctic research and operations, and U.S. participation in
international scientific efforts.
To promote the progress of science and maintain our Nation's scientific leadership and global
competitiveness, the United States must educate, train, and retain more scientists, engineers,
and computer scientists. Historically, underrepresented and underserved communities are the
largest untapped Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) talent pools in
the U.S. As such, NSF strives to encourage the full participation of all Americans and to remove
barriers to their doing so. This is reflected in NSF's Strategic Plan which is intended to ensure
all sectors of society have the opportunity to contribute to the scientific enterprise. NSF has
undertaken a broad range of activities in that regard, and one of the biggest takeaways from this
planning exercise is to fully appreciate the coordination required to ensure these activities are
robust, consistent, well-executed and evidence based. The Foundation is working on developing
a coordinating process to take on that role so that this plan and other activities realize their
potential for U.S. science.
2
SUMMARY OF ACTION PLAN
The successful implementation of this Executive Order (EO) is a top priority for the Foundation.
To respond to EO 13985 specifically, the Director established the Agency Equity Team
(AET), which has met regularly to plan for and conduct equity work. Continuing activities and
steps include: addressing sexual and other forms of harassment, optimizing demographic
data collection in support of equity assessments, increasing participation of disadvantaged
entities, (including Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs)), on Federal Acquisition Regulation-based
solicitation and awards, and removing barriers to enhanced participation by indigenous and
Native American communities.
NSF recognizes the vulnerabilities associated with trying to remove barriers to program
access for underserved communities without robust engagement activities. Therefore, NSF is
prioritizing its commitment to stakeholder engagement through hosting collaborations with
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), and
Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs). NSF seeks to host listening sessions and roundtables
on HBCU, HSI, and TCU campuses. NSF will utilize these events as opportunities to engage the
scientific community on equity issues at all academic levels, including students, senior scientists
and engineers, educators, and administrators.
The goal of the listening sessions is to meet with the community to acquire a better
understanding of the various barriers to program access to include technical assistance,
awareness, harassment, etc. NSF plans to cross-pollinate common threads learned from those
sessions across diverse stakeholders about removing barriers to program access.
NSF will begin the planning for the listening sessions and roundtables in FY22. NSF will
develop a formal strategy for incorporating any lessons learned and promising practices into
recommended program initiatives for implementation. NSF believes these efforts will potentially
mitigate the blind spots that may exist about the effects of barriers to full and equal access for
underrepresented and underserved communities.
3
SUMMARY OF EARLY ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Since NSF's previous EO 13985 plan was submitted, NSF has made several efforts to address
barriers to enhanced participation in the STEM enterprise by underserved Indigenous and
Native American communities. NSF Director Sethuraman Panchanathan held a Town Hall with
Tribal Nations in the Spring of 2021, with an accompanying 90-day comment period, ending
June 12, 2021, designed to provide an opportunity for Tribal Nations to share their thoughts on
how NSF could enhance its Tribal consultation efforts and build on its relationships with Tribal
Nations. NSF continues to focus weekly on plans for continuous engagement with Tribal Nations.
Currently plans include listening sessions with Tribal Leaders, to occur in March 2022.
NSF has included Indigenous community acknowledgments as part of its programmatic
agreements (PA) for some of its astronomical facilities. For example, the PA for the Daniel K.
Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST), which is located on the summit of Haleakala in Maui, HI, requires
researchers who base their research on data collected in whole or in part from DKIST to include
an acknowledgement of the use of this site of significant importance to Native Hawaiians in any
publication resulting from DKIST related research. There are likewise research acknowledgments
required by NSF funded researchers at Gemini North telescope, located within the Maunakea
Science Reserve and adjacent to the summit of Maunakea, and for visiting astronomers at NSF's
NOIRLab at Kitt Peak National Observatory. A more general land acknowledgment (see Focus
Area #4) has been proposed and will be reviewed by stakeholders.
The Foundation is currently revising the next version of the "NSF Proposal and Award Policies
and Procedures Guide" to specifically identify Tribal Governments as eligible organizations to
submit proposals for funding to NSF. This specific enhanced eligibility is a key action intended to
set the stage for increasing Native American STEM participation at NSF.
NSF recently focused on additional efforts to address sexual and other forms of harassment
associated with NSF-funded programs, specifically those supporting travel. In the latest version
of the NSF Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide (PAPPG) (NSF 22-1) (effective on
October 4, 2021), the Foundation included new requirements for NSF travel proposals. For
such proposals, the Authorized Organizational Representative must now certify that prior to
the proposer's participation in the meeting, the proposer will assure that the meeting organizer
has a written policy or code-of-conduct that addresses sexual harassment, other forms of
harassment, and sexual assault, and that includes clear and accessible means of reporting
violations of the policy or code-of-conduct. The policy or code-of-conduct must address the
method for making a complaint as well as how any complaints received during the meeting will
be resolved.
NSF has preliminary findings from an evaluation that was comprised of qualitative and
quantitative components designed to obtain valuable insights to (1) influence NSF's actions to
increase the efficacy of NSF's anti-harassment policies and (2) determine next steps in NSF's
continued efforts to evaluate its harassment prevention policies.
4
EQUITY ACTION PLAN
Focus Area # 1 - Efforts to Address Sexual and Other Forms of Harassment
Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
Sexual and other forms of harassment are barriers to full participation by
underrepresented groups (URGs) in the scientific endeavor.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
The latest efforts by the Foundation in addressing harassment as a barrier are focused on
(1) evaluating existing policies and (2) extending the reach of NSF harassment prevention
efforts to research activities at field sites and on research vessels.
(1) The evaluation of NSF's harassment prevention efforts focused on the term and
condition and the conference policy. Currently under review, preliminary findings
provide useful information for next steps in NSF efforts to dismantle barriers to
the participation of URGs in STEM. For example, the analysis of communications
shows that, on average, universities submitting proposals to NSF have adopted
an anti-harassment policy and disseminate it through their websites. This is not
true of businesses. The analysis also shows that NSF's conference policy had a
positive impact on adherence to the guidance provided by NSF. This finding holds
overall and by type of institution (R1 versus R2), but not for all types of MSIs. These
and other findings will inform ongoing NSF efforts to develop targeted approaches to
accelerate the impact of harassment prevention efforts, particularly given NSF's Strategic
Goal of increasing participation in the STEM enterprise and the Plan's focus on private
sector partnerships and MSIs. Findings will also inform next steps in monitoring and
evaluation activities.
(2) Fieldwork is in many STEM fields and presents unique challenges that can increase
the likelihood of harassment, including but not limited to challenging physical
conditions, social isolation, and limited communication methods. Work conducted
out in the field or at sea on vessels has also been associated with higher risks of
harassment, especially for individual minorities within the field team. A new internal
NSF working group was recently formed to consider the next steps for the Foundation
in this important area such as potential language for addition to the next version of the
Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide (PAPPG), and new opportunities for
internal/external outreach on this topic. NSF's vision and goal is that all research should
be done in an environment free from harassment.
Tracking Progress
NSF will track its progress through continued monitoring and evaluation activities.
Activities in the planning stages include interviews with NSF grantee institutions to gain
more in-depth understanding about how NSF harassment prevention efforts are received
and interact with institutional processes and practices, as well as surveys to gauge grantee
awareness, elicit opinions, and measure impacts over time.
5
NSF will track:
a. Progress toward adhering with agency anti-harassment policies across grantees
overall and by different types of institutions (such as private sector, academia, and
different types of MSIs)
b. Progress toward understanding factors that enhance or inhibit grantees' adherence
to NSF policies to adapt implementation as needed
Long term success will have the following characteristics:
C. Increasing share of grantees demonstrating knowledge of NSF policies, overall and
by type of institution
d. Increasing share of grantees adhering to NSF policies, overall and by type of
institution
Accountability
NSF will use the following actions:
a. Continued oversight. NSF's Equity Team, under the leadership of its members from
NSF's Office of Equity and Civil Rights, along with the program office, will oversee
implementation and monitor progress toward the goals identified in the "Tracking
Progress" section.
b. Enhanced programming. Based on findings from ongoing monitoring and
evaluation, NSF will revise and continue to expand its programming to promote
equity in participation in NSF programs through the promotion of anti-harassment
efforts.
Focus Area # 2 - Optimized demographic data collection in support of equity
assessments
Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
To evaluate the impacts of NSF's existing investments with respect to equity, response
rates from beneficiaries of NSF programs (such as Principal Investigators [PIs], reviewers,
post-doctoral fellows, teachers, and students) need to be increased to ensure NSF has
robust demographic data for analysis.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
NSF's earlier reports indicated that the agency would develop a plan for optimized
demographic collection from Pls. As it progressed, and in recognition of the value of
this work to the agency, this effort was expanded to include other participants of NSF
programs, namely, undergraduate students, graduate students, post-docs, and teachers.
To increase response rates across this wide range of beneficiaries of NSF programs, NSF
is developing (and implementing already) a suite of approaches that should improve data
quality, including enhancements to existing data collections. These include (1) piloting
changes to the user interface used to collect demographic data from Pls and (2) enhancing
a system to collect data from students and other potential beneficiaries of NSF programs.
(1) Improving collection of demographic data from Pls. The demographic questions
will display upon entry into Research.gov (instead of requiring that respondents
click on an icon to display the questions). Previously responses were not required,
6
and users could skip over the questions entirely. As part of the pilot, users must
provide some response, and "Do not wish to provide" is consistently offered as a
response category to retain the voluntary nature of the inquiry. The experiences
of other agencies and data collections suggest that these changes should result in
improved response rates. This approach is being pilot tested on Pls registering with
NSF for the first time as of September 2021. Ongoing monitoring suggests that the
pilot is driving a sharp increase in response rates for new users with a PI role. Out
of more than 3,000 users in the pilot, more than 95 percent provided gender
information and more than 90 percent provided race, ethnicity, and disability
information, compared with rates of 45 percent for gender and below 40 percent
for the other demographic information in the same period a year ago. As the pilot
continues, these estimates might change, but these early results are encouraging.
(2) Improving collection of demographic data among applicants and participants
in NSF programs, and greatly enhancing NSF's ability to conduct rigorous
evaluations. NSF is also expanding its Education and Training Application (ETAP)
to collect information from a broader range of potential participants in NSF
programs: undergraduate and graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and
teachers. The FY 2022 pilot launched at the end of November 2021. As of mid-
January, preliminary results from 339 users with completed applications (among
more than 6,000 current users expected to submit applications) show response
rates above 90 percent for most demographic questions, and as high as 98 percent
(for sex and gender identity, for example). This suggests that ETAP, once scaled
up, will provide NSF with access to high quality data to monitor (in real time) and
rigorously evaluate (using comparison group designs) its efforts to develop the
STEM workforce and contribute to the scientific enterprise.
The importance of having high quality demographic data on actual and potential
participants in NSF programs cannot be overstated, as these data are crucial for NSF to
assess equity in participation over time and adapt its programming as the context of
implementation changes to promote equity.
Tracking Progress
NSF will use quantitative indicators to track:
a. Progress toward achieving high response rates in demographic data collections
b. Progress toward receiving useful responses from respondents to NSF data
collections (instead of opting out)
Long term success will have the following characteristics:
a.
Increasing and high response rates in demographic data collections
b. Decreasing refusals (respondents who opt out from providing a response)
Accountability
NSF will use the following actions:
a. Continue to support efforts to improve data collections
b. Provide updates to NSF leadership to support the adoption of successful pilot
initiatives and expansion across agency programs to scale up impacts
7
Focus Area # 3 - Increase Participation of Disadvantaged Entities, including
MSIs, on Federal Acquisition Regulation-based solicitation and awards
Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
Creating an equitable and inclusive contracting environment for MSIs and small
disadvantaged businesses (SDBs), including those owned by women and people of color,
is challenging. Increasing access to NSF procurement staff and solicitations/awards for
NSF procurement actions and an inclusive contracting strategy will result in income and
jobs for disadvantaged entities.
The complexity of federal contracting frustrates existing and new entrants to the Federal
acquisition process. Contracting inequities can be internal to the government (e.g.,
business practices) and driven by how large prime contractors provide subcontracting
opportunities. Further, category management practices and best-in-class solutions
negatively impact the ability of disadvantaged entities and new entrants to position
themselves access to compete and secure awards. The barriers we seek to address are
a lack of understanding of how to do business with NSF and access to program/technical
experts.
Action and Intended Impact on Barriers:
1) Increased outreach to MSIs and SDBs. The NSF Senior Procurement Executive
(SPE) and Office of Small and Disadvantaged Utilization (OSDBU) revised
the Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support's (DACS) outreach and
communications plan. The plan promotes fair, frequent, and constructive dialogue
with the community on matters of mutual interest, as appropriate, and in a manner
that protects sensitive information, operation, sources, methods, and technologies.
The SPE and Deputy (Director), OSBDU will conduct a series of outreach sessions for
SDBs and MSIs. The sessions will specifically address how to effectively do business
with NSF, introductions to program office staff, and upcoming requirements of
interest to these entities. By providing access to DACS, OSDBU, and program offices
while targeting diverse suppliers, the focused outreach will assist NSF in reducing
the barrier to equitable outcomes.
The OSDBU will revise its public-facing website to provide SDBs and MSIs a better
understanding of how to do business with NSF and reduce the uneven advantages
of communication and access to NSF between small and large businesses.
2) Improved market research and acquisition planning. Effective market research
will produce procurements that efficiently meet NSF needs and enable mission
success in a way that ensures a resilient vendor base, meets Small Business
Administration (SBA) goals, and complies with the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
Creating a diverse vendor base ensures a diversity of approaches when it comes to
problem-solving. This gives NSF a better opportunity to guarantee the flow of new
and competing ideas and enhances the availability of those ideas. Finally, a diverse
vendor base will ensure opportunities for non-traditional vendors and vendors that
have not previously worked at or for NSF.
Strategies and tools identified for use include:
8
a. Requests for Information (RFI) - RFIs are a way of requesting information from
the vendor community and will be posted publicly to www.sam.gov or reserved
for response by small and disadvantaged entities.
b. One-on-One Briefings - NSF engages one-on-one with small and disadvantaged
entities to receive input and identify vendors capable of supporting its mission
C. Hosting Industry Days - Industry days allow interested vendors to ask questions
of NSF personnel, contribute ideas, and interact with NSF procurement and
program personnel. It provides an opportunity for vendors to gain a clear
understanding of the NSF goals and objectives.
3) Increased subcontracting opportunities and enforcement of subcontracting
plans. Not all contracts and awards are suitable for small and disadvantaged
entities. In those cases, NSF must provide opportunities for small and
disadvantaged entities to subcontract. For all contracts not set aside for small
businesses, DACS must coordinate with the owner of the requirements and the
OSDBU to design reasonable subcontracting goals.
NSF will clearly identify goals for small business participation in all prime contracts
and actively track compliance with and achievements of those goals. Including small
business provides those entities with the revenue and experience to help them
grow to bid on future procurements and increased competition, which drives down
the cost to the government.
Tracking Progress
Reduction of barriers will be tracked as follows:
a. Progress towards achieving/exceeding small business prime goals
b. Progress towards achieving/exceeding small business subcontracting goals
C. NSF will solicit feedback on outreach sessions and industry days from participants
Long term success will have the following characteristics:
a. Successful achievement of small business goals, including the SDB goal which is
increasing from 5% to 15% of total annual contract obligations
b. Increase in the number of small and disadvantaged entities receiving prime and
subcontract awards
Accountability
NSF will use the following actions:
a. Include the achievement of small business contracting goals as a part of the
performance plans for Senior Executive Service (SES) officials
b. Ensure agency small business contracting offices have access to senior leadership
9
Focus Area # 4 - Efforts to remove barriers to enhanced participation of
underserved Indigenous and Native American communities in the Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) enterprise
Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
Lack of robust connections based on trust between NSF and Indigenous and Native
American communities is a barrier to full participation in NSF's programs and activities.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
The kinds of connections NSF is seeking with Indigenous and Native American
communities require sustained outreach and consistent relationship building. These
relationships, moreover, must be based in trust. Many members of Indigenous and
Native American communities are skeptical of researchers and/or funding agencies, and
therefore demonstrating an understanding and respect for tribal sovereignty and the
status of tribes is paramount.
An informal working group comprised of staff with expertise in working with Tribal nations
and indigenous researchers was immediately formed to develop NSF's response. This
group was so successful and motivated for long term results that the Director approved
elevating the status of the group to an official permanent Office of the Director (OD)
Working Group.
To launch NSF's renewed tribal consultation efforts, the Director held a Town Hall
with Tribal Nations in Spring, 2021, with an accompanying 90-day comment period
(ending June 12, 2021) designed to provide an opportunity for Tribal Nations to share
their thoughts on how NSF could enhance its Tribal Consultation efforts and build on
its relationships with Tribes. NSF received 22 written and verbal responses, including
responses from the Chief of the Shawnee Tribe (who commented that "Nothing [should
be] about us without us"), the Chair of the Cherokee Nation Environmental Protection
Commission, the President of Little Big Horn College (a tribal college), Tribal members,
representatives of Tribal organizations, and Tribal researchers. From these responses,
NSF identified approximately 60 separate comments concerning the following broad
topics: NSF/Program outreach and relationship building; solicitation and proposal
development; and the merit review process.
After analyzing the comments received, the OD Working Group developed an Action Plan,
which was submitted to OMB on April 26, 2021. Following submission of NSF's Action Plan,
NSF posted materials related to the Director's Town Hall, the Action Plan, and comments
received during the 90-day comment period to the NSF webpage. NSF's analysis of
comments, which included both internal (NSF) and external comments, also enabled the
agency to identify topics to focus on for future listening sessions. NSF sought advice from
other federal agencies with expertise in Tribal consultation regarding the format and
logistics for holding listening sessions with Tribal Nations.
The NSF Director further acted on his commitment to enhance NSF's Tribal consultation
efforts by formally establishing the Tribal Consultation and Engagement Working Group
(TCE Working Group). The TCE Working Group is charged with continuing the work of the
informal Working Group. This includes completing the initial gathering of information
through listening sessions and an accompanying comment period and developing formal
recommendations for long-term implementation of the Action Plan.
10
The TCE Working Group is in the final stage of planning listening sessions on two topics to
be held between March 22, 2022, and May 5, 2022. The first topic will address "Promoting
Meaningful Government-to-Government Consultation and Engagement" and the second
topic will address "Enhancing Collaboration on Research." Three sessions will be held
on different days and times for each topic to provide flexibility to participants and to
accommodate those in different time zones. In addition, NSF will hold a 60-day comment
period that will begin before the first listening session and end on May 14, 2022. Tribal
Nations can provide comments via email or regular mail during this comment period. In
addition, NSF is planning in-person, one-on-one, or small group stakeholder engagement
activities to provide another means communication between Tribal Nations and NSF.
NSF also plans to make an interactive virtual meeting room available to Tribal Nation
representatives during the comment period as an additional way to participate in
this process. This virtual meeting room is a creative and innovative tool that provides
participants with an accessible, convenient, and interesting space to access information
about NSF (in general), NSF's Action Plan, and the listening sessions. It also provides an
opportunity for participants to easily submit comments during their visit to the virtual
meeting room. We view the implementation of this tailored technology as a critical step in
promoting inclusivity and overcoming barriers to participation in that it is readily available
regardless of geographic location or time zone and, not only inviting, but easy to use and
navigate.
Following the conclusion of the listening sessions and comment period, NSF will analyze
all written and verbal comments received from Tribal Nations and work to develop specific
recommendations regarding ways in which: 1) NSF's consultation and engagement
efforts can be improved through research policies and practices and potential strategies
for addressing issues of concern to Tribal Nations; and 2) NSF can enhance its research
policies and practices to encourage more participation from Tribes in STEM research and
respect tribal sovereignty.
In addition to the action items identified above, NSF has begun work on developing a
land acknowledgment statement that could be used at the outset of NSF meetings and
conferences. The draft recognizes that this land on which the NSF Headquarter is located
holds great historical, spiritual, and personal significance to Indigenous people of the
region and that the leaders of the meeting/conference are grateful and appreciative to be
there.
Tracking Progress
Progress will be tracked through indicators such as:
a. NSF's Tribal Consultation and Engagement Working Group (TCE) will track progress
through the following indicators: Number of engagement activities completed by
NSF (such as listening sessions) over time
b. Number of participants in each activity, preferably with Tribal affiliations
c. Number of comments received, overall, by mode of transmission (such as email,
mail, or virtual meeting room), and if possible, by Tribal affiliation
d. Traffic in the virtual meeting room, overall and by type of use (such as downloading
information)
e. Drafting and approval of the land acknowledgment statement and of guidance for
11
NSF staff and contractors to promote its use
Long term success will have the following characteristics:
a. Sustained consultation and engagement results in tangible changes to NSF
practices, procedures, or policies to engage and support the participation of Tribal
nations in NSF programs and activities
b. The land acknowledgment statement is increasingly used in NSF meetings and
conferences
C. Participation of Tribal Nations and their members in NSF's portfolio increases over
time (e.g., as measured by participation in NSF programs through research awards,
scholarships, fellowships, research experiences, and so on)
Accountability
NSF's Tribal Consultation and Engagement Working Group will oversee implementation
and report to the Office of the Director regularly on progress.
Focus area #5 - Efforts to enhance actions to establish and support the Civil
Rights Program
Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
NSF is committed to ensuring the necessary resources are available to implement a
robust civil rights program designed to mitigate and eliminate barriers to equity in
program delivery.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
NSF is actively pursuing actions in four areas: (1) reviewing ongoing efforts to advance
equity across the Agency, (2) revisiting the composition and organizational structure of
OECR to amplify its effectiveness, (3) conducting an organizational assessment in support
of OECR goals, and (4) acting on the findings of the Racial Equity Task Force report. These
are described below.
NSF will continue ongoing reviews of offices and directorates' efforts to advance civil rights
and include underrepresented, underserved, or disadvantaged communities in NSF's
funding portfolio. These reviews will help monitor implementation, assess progress, and
ensure adequate resources.
Consistent with these reviews, the Office of Equity and Civil Rights (OECR) recently
established a new senior executive service (SES) position of Deputy Office Head. This
position will ensure the reviews are robust and findings disseminated to leadership
to ensure they are influential and will also support internal and external civil rights
programs, such as Title VI, IX, and harassment-prevention efforts. In addition, the OECR is
reorganizing to align staff more efficiently, while adding new positions to support program
expansion. This effort expands OECR's capability to serve internal NSF staff, as well as
NSF's external community in ensuring equity in all areas of NSF's work.
OECR's reorganization will be supported through an organizational assessment. The
agency's goal is to eliminate barriers to equity that can arise from having DEIA initiatives
in silos throughout the agency without an overarching coordinating role. The plan
is to assess the appropriateness of global DEIA policy guidance and coordination,
12
develop strategic planning with meaningful and impactful metrics, and support annual
performance reporting. The agency will make any business realignments and provide the
necessary resources for a successful program.
NSF staff recently completed a report focused on racial equity. This report provided
insights and recommendations in several areas, including employment and program
delivery. NSF intends to incorporate, as applicable and appropriate, mitigating strategies
to address potential barriers to equity identified in this report.
Tracking Progress
NSF will track progress as follows:
a. Completion of assessments, such as the office/directorate reviews and the OECR
organizational assessment
b. Dissemination of findings to NSF leadership and co-creation of actionable
recommendations for Agency adoption
Long term success will have the following characteristics:
a. Findings from the assessments result in changes to NSF organizational
structures, policies, or practices in support of DEIA efforts. Examples include: the
reorganization of OECR in support of its mission; and anti-harassment policies are
expanded or revised to ensure thorough coverage of research environments
b. NSF continues to provide resources and leadership support for ongoing monitoring
and evaluation of DEIA efforts
Accountability
The Office of the Director will monitor progress through monthly reports from OECR.
OECR will disseminate findings, recommendations, and actions widely across the Agency.
13
