National Science Foundation
Evaluation Policy
September 2020
Goldenrod research. Credit: Nick Sloff/Penn State.
About This Policy
This document outlines key principles guiding evaluation activities conducted or supported by NSF. It is based
on current NSF evaluation principles (NSF's Evaluation Principles, 2016; NSF Information Quality Guidelines,
2018); aligned with NSF values of learning, excellence, inclusion, collaboration, integrity, and transparency (NSF
Strategic Plan, 2018); and informed by legislation and guidance regarding federal evaluation and performance
management activities (including the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, the Data
Quality Act of 2001, and Office of Management and Budget guidance OMB M-20-12).
About The National Science Foundation (NSF)
NSF was created "to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure
the national defense.. (1950, as amended).
NSF seeks to achieve these goals through an integrated
strategy that advances the frontiers of knowledge; cultivates
a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering
workforce; expands the scientific literacy of all citizens;
builds the nation's research capability through investments
in advanced instrumentation and facilities; and supports
excellence in science and engineering research and
education.
NSF is committed to evaluating the efficacy and efficiency of
its strategy, leveraging evaluation to help the Agency achieve
its mission.
National Science Foundation Headquarters,
Alexandria, Virginia.
Scope of Evaluation Activities
An evaluation is "an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis... (OMB M-20-12). Assessments
may have different targets-an intervention, program, policy, and SO on-and serve different purposes, such
as monitoring progress, guiding improvement efforts, or determining the effectiveness or efficiency of the
target intervention, program, or policy.
The principles described in this document therefore apply to a wide range of activities conducted as part
of efforts to generate evidence useful for decision making. These include policy studies, performance
measurement, and descriptive and exploratory analysis (also known as "foundational fact-finding," OMB
M-20-12).
Throughout this document, the term "evaluations" refers to all of these evidence-building efforts and
"evaluators" and "researchers" refer to individuals involved in these efforts.
NSF Evaluation Policy September 2020
1
Evaluation Principles
Five principles are presented in this document:
1. Relevance and Utility
2. High Quality and Rigor
3. Independence and Objectivity
4. Transparency and Reproducibility
5. Ethics
These principles align with and affirm NSF's commitment to federal
evaluation standards and leading research practices.
Selected enabling practices are included to showcase examples of
NSF practices that foster implementation of these principles.
Researchers-inside and outside of the Agency-participating
in NSF's evidence-building activities are expected to adopt the
principles described here for findings from their work to be useful
for stakeholders. They are also expected to balance decisions
judiciously in addressing tensions or conflicts among principles, if
any arise.
1.
Relevance and Utility
Evaluations supported by NSF must address questions of
importance and serve the information needs of stakeholders.
These evaluations should present findings that are clear,
actionable, and timely to inform Agency activities and actions such
as program improvement, accountability, management, and policy
development.
Enabling practice:
To ensure relevance and utility of evidence-building
activities, evaluators must collaborate with stakeholders
in different phases of the work, as appropriate. These
stakeholders include leadership supporting the effort,
program officers who may use findings to inform
decisions, and others.
VLA radio telescopes at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory.
Credit: Andrew Clegg, NSF.
2.
High Quality and Rigor
Evaluations must produce credible evidence-that is, findings that NSF and its stakeholders can confidently
rely upon. To produce such evidence while balancing constraints such as time and resources, evaluations must
rely on the most appropriate designs and methods to answer key questions, provide clear explanations of
limitations, ensure appropriate execution of the study design with quality controls and regular risk monitoring,
and promote proper interpretation of findings.
Enabling practice:
To develop high quality evaluations, whenever appropriate, NSF-supported studies shall begin by
developing a logic model (based on a theory of change), which provides a framework to understand
and communicate how a program or intervention is hypothesized to yield expected results.
NSF Evaluation Policy | September 2020
2
3.
Independence and Objectivity
NSF is committed to supporting evaluations that are objective
and unbiased. This is essential to produce credible findings that
stakeholders may rely upon in making decisions. Evaluators shall
strive for objectivity and avoid bias in planning, conducting,
interpreting, and disseminating findings from the studies in
which they participate. To this end, the implementation of
evaluation activities, including how evaluators are selected and
operate, shall be insulated from undue influences that may
affect their objectivity, impartiality, and professional judgement.
Enabling practice:
NSF evaluators and collaborators shall follow NSF
procedures to identify and prevent conflicts of interest
and engage in peer-review and quality control processes
at appropriate stages of the life cycle of an evaluation.
4.
Transparency and Reproducibility
NSF promotes transparency in the planning, implementation,
and reporting phases of evaluation activities to promote
dialogue that enhances quality, enables accountability, and
prevents tailoring that influences findings. Transparency is
crucial to support reproducibility and contribute to advancing
knowledge. Whenever possible, completed evaluations will be
released in a timely manner and with sufficient detail to support
use of findings (including comparability to the existing literature)
and replication.
Enabling practice:
To the extent possible, decisions regarding the
specification of the evaluation-such as objectives, design
and methods, and dissemination of findings-will be
documented ahead of time, taking into consideration and
abiding by any legal, ethical, national security, or other
constraints to disclosing information.
Small icebergs and pancake ice near Palmer Station.
Credit: Ken Keena.
5.
Ethics
Evaluations supported by NSF will be conducted to the highest ethical standards to protect the public and
maintain public trust in the Agency's evidence-building efforts. Evaluations shall be planned and implemented
to safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of participants and other stakeholders and affected entities,
abiding by regulations governing research involving human subjects. Evaluations will be equitable, fair, just, and
consider contextual factors that could influence the findings, their interpretation, or their use.
Enabling practice:
Researchers engaged in studies supported by NSF shall submit their work for quality review before use or
release to ensure ethical and other principles are upheld.
NSF Evaluation Policy | September 2020
3
Quantum puzzle piece. Credit: Michael T. Fang, Martinis Group, UC Santa Barbara.
Note
The principles presented in this document complement and often overlap with those included in prior guidance
adopted by NSF, namely, the Evaluation Principles (2016) and NSF's Information Quality Guidelines (2018).
Questions? Please contact the Evaluation and Assessment Capability (EAC) team at eac@nsf.gov.
References
Data Quality Act, Public Law No. 106-554, Section 515.
National Science Foundation. (2016). Evaluation Principles.
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Public Law No. 115-435, 132 Stat. 5529.
National Science Foundation. (2018). Information Quality Guidelines. Prepared in accordance with Section 515 of
Public Law 106-554.
National Science Foundation Act of 1950, 42 U.S.C. 1861-75 as amended.
Office of Management and Budget. (2020). Phase 4 Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018: Program Evaluation Standards and Practices, OMB M-20-12.
NSF Evaluation Policy I September 2020
4
