National Science Foundation
Capacity Assessment
Final Report
March 2022
This report describes the National Science Foundation's design, implementation, and
findings of (1) an integrated assessment of data maturity and capacity for evidence
generation and use and (2) an analysis of ongoing evidence-building activities.
Table of Contents
Executive Summary
2
Introduction
4
Section 1: Organizational Capacity Assessment
6
A. Framework
7
Phase 1: Identify NSF Needs and Pilot the Framework
7
Phase 2: Hone the Framework and Diversify Perspectives
7
B. Methodology
11
Selecting Participants
11
Collecting Data
13
Assigning Maturity Ratings
15
C. Enterprise-Level Findings
17
Key Takeaways
17
Enterprise-Level Maturity Ratings
18
Theme-Level Observations
20
Conclusions
21
Section 2: Analysis of NSF's Inventory of Evidence-Building Activities
22
A. Methodology
23
Data Sources
24
Document Review
24
Limitations
25
Quality Assurance
25
B. Findings
26
Inventory
26
Relevance and Utility
26
High Quality and Rigor
30
Independence and Objectivity
31
Transparency and Reproducibility
31
Ethics
32
Conclusions
32
Next Steps
33
Appendix
34
A. Requirements Coverage
34
B. List of Evidence-Building Activities
35
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
1
Executive Summary
Spinning brown dwarf with narrow colored atmospheric bands
Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
This report presents the design and methodology of the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Capacity
Assessment, findings from the analysis, and next steps to act on the findings. As designed, the Capacity
Assessment complies with the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act) and
Federal Data Strategy. Findings will help guide improvements to bolster agency capacity to produce useful
evidence for decision-making.
NSF's Capacity Assessment includes two components:
An organizational capacity assessment - Section 1 of this report
This assessment seeks to measure agency maturity in four foundational themes:
1. Building a culture that values data and promotes public use
2. Governing, managing, and protecting data
3. Promoting efficient and appropriate data use
4. Generating evidence and supporting evidence generation and use
The findings presented in this report are based on all 10 eligible Directorates and Offices, or
120 agency staff. Data were collected through focus groups and a review of supporting artifacts
(documents that demonstrate existing policies, processes, or practices).
An analysis of NSF's inventory of evidence-building activities - Section 2 of this report
NSF compiled a comprehensive inventory of "statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis efforts"
that were ongoing during fiscal year 2021 and met other selection criteria used to identify agency
evidence-building efforts. This inventory is based on data collected through multiple sources:
(1) NSF Directorates and Offices providing information to prepare the annual budget request;
(2) Evaluation and Assessment Capability Section (EAC), which provides support to NSF Directorates
and Offices; (3) information collection requests submitted to the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB); and (4) grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts executed in support of
agency evidence-building activities.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
2
Findings from the organizational assessment show that NSF has a culture that values data and evidence, with
leadership setting a strong tone regarding the Foundation's commitment to evidence-based decision-making
On average, NSF operates in the middle stages of data and evidence maturity for each foundational theme
assessed (data culture, data governance, data use, and evidence generation and use). Variation in maturity
across Directorates and Offices revealed pockets of excellence and innovation, with some NSF organizations
operating at high levels of maturity. For example, these Directorates and Offices had well-established and
enforced data governance processes or conducted studies to generate useful evidence for decision-making
Highly mature efforts may provide models to adopt or build on in developing an agencywide strategy that
leverages NSF's culture of evidence in support of consistent practices and procedures.
Analysis of evidence-building activities shows that, in FY 2021, NSF is pursuing 39 formal activities. Most of
these activities are conducted in support of the agency's mission, benefit stakeholders across the entire
agency, address a variety of questions to meet a wide range of needs, and rely on methodologies (from
rigorous program evaluations to exploratory policy analysis) that are well aligned with the research questions.
Findings from the analysis of ongoing studies aligned with those of the organizational assessment and
underscored both the value that NSF places on evidence and the need for some targeted improvements.
The following emerged as the most salient candidates for agencywide improvements:
Establishing agencywide procedures and standards in areas such as documentation,
quality reviews, and change management will support data science and analysis and the
creation of sound tools to generate reliable and consistent findings.
Improving alignment of data architecture and goals for increased reliance on data
SS
will enable more flexible and independent data integration, analysis, and analytics tools
development.
Developing an NSF data skills training plan or guidance on data-related training will
help align upskilling efforts with NSF's vision for future data capabilities.
F
Providing guidance on evidence-generating activities will increase capacity across the
agency to produce useful evidence for decision-making.
The main finding of the analyses presented in this report is important for the agency's future: NSF values
data and has a strong culture of using evidence to inform decisions. Further embracing and strengthening,
rather than changing, our culture is our next step. The question is, how? The distribution of organizational
assessment scores and of evidence-building activities across NSF units suggests that NSF's data culture
developed organically and in a decentralized manner over time. To further mature data and evidence
capabilities, NSF will build on existing pockets of excellence to (1) formalize agencywide policies, standards,
and procedures related to data and evidence and (2) advance efforts to upskill staff as part of our workforce
strategy and in alignment with our Strategic Plan.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
3
Introduction
This Capacity Assessment Report presents (1) the design and methodology of the National Science Foundation's
(NSF) organizational maturity assessment (of data and evidence use and generation) and analysis of NSF's
inventory evidence-building activities, (2) findings from both the organizational assessment and inventory
analysis, and (3) planned next steps for the agency to act on the findings. These efforts respond to article
nine of Title | of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Public Law No. 115-435
(Evidence Act), follow guidance provided by the Office of Management and Budget (such as OMB M-19-23
and OMB Circular A-11), and align with NSF's focus on generating and using evidence for decision-making.
The goal of this Capacity Assessment is to produce actionable findings that can guide improvement efforts
to bolster agency capacity to produce useful information to inform decisions. To this end, NSF's Capacity
Assessment includes two components:
An organizational capacity assessment
Section 1 of this report
An analysis of NSF's inventory of evidence-building activities
Section 2 of this report
Aurora Australis and Milky Way over IceCube laboratory
Credit: Yuya Makino, IceCube/NSF
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
4
The design of this Capacity Assessment is based on
.a careful review of existing legislation, OMB guidance, and agency needs and priorities to determine
the goals of the Assessment and the range of capabilities needed to support agency efforts to generate
and use evidence. The Assessment will also enable NSF to determine the extent to which agency efforts
in the areas outlined in the Evidence Act-statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis-meet the criteria
of coverage, high quality, appropriate methods, effectiveness (in meeting stakeholder needs), and
independence.
three foundational decisions to ensure the Assessment produced useful information and was conducted
efficiently. Specifically, NSF decided to:
1. Integrate efforts. NSF designed an organizational capacity assessment that integrated two related
efforts-the data maturity assessment required under the Federal Data Strategy and the capacity
assessment required under the Evidence Act-to avoid redundancies, reduce burden, and build
efficiencies.
2. Assess capacity at two levels. NSF designed two components-one focused at the organizational
level and one at the activity level-to thoroughly examine the maturity of infrastructure, processes,
and people capabilities supporting data and evidence generation and use.
3. Measure both evidence generation and evidence use. NSF intentionally decoupled evidence
generation from evidence use to measure capacity in these distinct areas. As a result, the organizational
assessment framework makes clear distinctions between capabilities for evidence generation versus
use and instances where capabilities can impact both areas.
Appendix A shows the alignment of NSF's design with the Evidence Act requirements.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
5
Section 1
Organizational Capacity Assessment
This section presents the framework, methods, and enterprise-level findings of NSF's
organizational capacity assessment. Enterprise-level findings are based on all eligible
NSF units (10 Directorates and Offices).
Rapidly rotating brown dwarf
Credit: International Gemini Observatory/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/J. da Silva
A. Framework
NSF designed an organizational assessment focused on four themes: (1) building a culture that values data and
promotes public use, (2) governing, managing, and protecting data, (3) promoting efficient and appropriate
data use, and (4) generating evidence and supporting evidence generation and use. This assessment combines
legislative requirements for evidence-building activities (focus of the Evidence Act) with foundational data
capabilities (focus of the Federal Data Strategy). The assessment framework was developed collaboratively
by NSF staff with subject matter and methodological expertise across three NSF units-the Evaluation and
Assessment Capability (EAC) Section; the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES); and
the Office of Budget, Finance, and Award Management (BFA)-as well as a contractor with deep expertise in
maturity assessments. Together these collaborators form the assessment team.
Phase 1: Identify NSF Needs and Pilot the Framework
The assessment team reviewed industry and government maturity
Engaging stakeholders in
models, including the Federal Government Data Maturity (FGDM)
design and implementation
model, the Capability Maturity Model Integration, the Stanford
Data Governance Maturity Model, the DataFlux Maturity Model,
The assessment team worked
and several others. The FGDM became the foundation for NSF's
closely with Directorate and
tailored model to cover measurement goals of the Evidence Act
Office liaisons to (1) preview
and Federal Data Strategy. Once approved by NSF's Evidence Act
and receive feedback on the
and Data Governance Steering Committee, the assessment team
framework, (2) identify and
completed a pilot test with individuals from five NSF Directorates
recruit participants, and (3)
and Offices.
organize presentations of
Directorate- and Office-level
Phase 2: Hone the Framework and Diversify Perspectives
findings.
An after-action review with participants in the initial pilot test
Liaisons tended to be data
of the assessment led to revisions. These included removing
analytics officers and other
redundant capability areas and questions, expanding the scoring
technical or data savvy staff
rubric, and highlighting evidence generation and use in a separate
across NSF. Their feedback,
theme within the framework (Theme 4). These revisions enabled
combined with that received
NSF to streamline the number of capabilities from 50 to 36 while
during the first phase, increased
increasing usefulness of insights, particularly those pertaining to
the coverage and balance of
evidence generation and use. During the second phase, NSF also
perspectives in the design of
engaged data savvy Directorate and Office liaisons which increased
the assessment. In addition,
the coverage and balance of perspectives in the assessment.
their participation enabled the
successful implementation
The final integrated data maturity and evidence capacity assessment
of the organizational capacity
framework is displayed in Exhibit 1.
assessment across the agency.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
7
Exhibit 1 - NSF Integrated Data Maturity and Evidence Capacity Assessment Framework
This framework is based on the Federal Government Data Maturity Model and adapted to integrate a focus on
evidence generation and use. Information about the 36 capabilities identified in the framework was collected
through (1) focus groups with agency staff and (2) artifacts provided by focus group participants.
4
12
36
Foundational
Dimensions
People, Process, and
Themes
of Interest
Infrastructure Capabilities
Data Capacity Needs Assessment
Data Capacity Building
Building a Culture that
Data Personnel
Use of Data to Guide Decision-Making
Values Data and Promotes
Data Culture
Data Demand and Use Frequency
Public Use
Accountability and Public Confidence
Change Management
Operating Model
Policies and Standards
Data Governance
Privacy Considerations
Data Protection
Classification, Retention, and Disclosure
Data Operations
Data Requirements
Governing, Managing,
Data Quality
Architectural Fit and Alignment
and Protecting Data
Platform and
Data Tools
Architecture
Data Quality Approach
Data Inventory
Monitoring and Reporting
Metadata Management
Accessibility of Inventory
Collaboration and Sharing Spaces
Analytics
Techniques for Insight
Promoting Efficient and
Capabilities
Managing Tiered Access
Appropriate Data Use
Data Access
Open Data
Engage to Share Data Asset Knowledge
Ongoing Efforts
Evidence Relevance
Evidence Utility
Balance of Needs
Generating
Evidence Independence
High-Value
Evidence Resourcing - Supply
Generating Evidence
Evidence
Evidence Resourcing - Demand
....
and Supporting Evidence
Supporting
Evidence
Evidence Resourcing - Training and Development
Generation and Use
Generation
Evidence Infrastructure
and Use
Evidence Policies
Evidence Procedures and Practices
Expectation of Use
Available Funding
Leadership Support
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
8
Theme 1
Building a Culture that Values Data and Promotes Public Use
This theme focuses on NSF leadership and staff attitudes related to managing and using data to promote
data skills and public accountability. Capabilities in this theme strongly support evidence-building areas,
including generating learning priorities, designing and conducting studies, communicating findings, and
documenting the use of findings. This theme assesses how well the agency:
Incentivizes and supports learning among all staff
Manages changes associated with learning, feedback, and improved data capabilities
Creates a culture that promotes the robust management and use of data and evidence
Ensures data maintained by the agency support performance measurement to help the public and
external partners understand agency outcomes and decisions
Theme 2
Governing, Managing, and Protecting Data
This theme focuses on providing trusted, protected, and usable (well-documented) data that support
business- and mission-driven information needs. Data governance, management, and protection
capabilities are necessary to support NSF evaluation principles, such as high quality, rigor, and ethics. This
theme assesses how well the agency:
Governs data-related decisions across the data lifecycle
Protects data through the appropriate use of leading data security standards, procedures, controls, and
technology
Identifies data quality issues and provides methods to remediate them
Ensures that data requirements are specified upfront and incorporated as appropriate into the data
lifecycle
Provides the best-fit technology to support NSF's objectives through the ingestion, curation, storage,
archival, dissemination, reporting, and analysis of data assets
Provides comprehensive documentation for data assets in accessible repositories
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
9
Theme 3
Promoting Efficient and Appropriate Data Use
This theme focuses on providing data consumers access to the information needed to inform everyday
decisions. Efficient and appropriate data use capabilities ensure NSF staff use data in decision-making.
This theme assesses how well the agency:
Equips staff with the analytical skills and tools needed to design, conduct, and facilitate the use of findings
from studies
Creates mechanisms to promote use of data in policy, planning, and operations
Makes NSF data available and easy to access in a controlled and secure manner
Theme 4
Generating Evidence and Supporting Evidence Generation and Use
This theme focuses on activities that generate high-value evidence and appropriately supporting evidence
generation and use. Going one step further than theme three, these capabilities provide NSF staff with the
results of analyses (such as point estimates) to be used in decision-making, and also insights and actionable
recommendations to make the best decision possible. This theme assesses how well the agency:
Records ongoing evaluation and analysis activities to support organizational decisions
Generates evidence that is relevant and responsive to users' needs
Maintains independence and avoids bias in evidence generating activities
Aligns staff with appropriate skills to its evidence-generation and use needs
Provides guidance on evidence generation and drives an expectation of evidence use
Delivers the requisite leadership support and financial resources to achieve goals related to evidence
generation and use
Small icebergs and pancake ice near Palmer Station
Credit: Ken Keenan
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
10
B. Methodology
Selecting Participants
NSF pursued a two-phased approach to selecting participants. In the first
phase, the assessment team identified the universe of NSF Directorates and
Offices to be included (10 units, six Directorates and four Offices). In the
second phase, the assessment team identified key individuals within those
units. Participants represented different roles across data and evidence
generation and use (more details on page 12). Deep engagement within each
Directorate or Office enabled the team to generate enterprise-level results
and provide each Directorate and Office with its specific unit-level results.
NSF considered sampling NSF units-for example, stratifying units by type
(such as Directorates versus Offices) or data/evidence capabilities (more
or less mature)-but did not need to resort to sampling given widespread
interest across eligible Directorates and Offices and deep engagement of
liaisons who facilitated implementation.
The results presented in Section C are based on all eligible NSF units and
individuals who participated. See Exhibit 2 for detailed information regarding
participant selection and data collection.
Melting ice in the Arctic Ocean
Credit: Zhangxian Ouyang, University of Delaware
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
11
Exhibit 2 - Participant Selection and Data Collection
Participant Selection
Phase I: NSF units
10 Directorates/Offices
Office of the Director, Office of Integrative Activities, EAC
Office of Budget, Finance, and Award Management
Office of Information and Resource Management
Directorate for Biological Sciences
Directorate for Computer and Information Science & Engineering
Included
Directorate for Education and Human Resources
Directorate for Engineering
Directorate for Geosciences
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics (Themes 1-3 only)
1. Four smaller NSF units within the Office of the Director (Office of the
General Counsel, Office of Legislative and Public Affairs, Office of Diversity
and Inclusion, Office of International Science and Engineering) that receive
data-and evidence-related support from those included in this assessment
Excluded
2. Two NSF units ineligible for this assessment due to their oversight or
consultative functions-namely the Office of the Inspector General and
National Science Board
Some Directorates/Offices have data and evidence-building capabilities
concentrated in one subdivision (division/section/front office), while others
Phase II: Participant
have capabilities distributed across subdivisions (with staff assigned to
selection within NSF units
divisions/programs). Where capabilities are concentrated/centralized, that
(adjusted to variation
subdivision was included (for example, the EAC Section in the Office of
in organizational structures)
Integrative Activities). Where those capabilities are decentralized, selected
staff across subdivisions within that Directorate or Office participated to
ensure adequate representation (for example, Directorate for Engineering).
Data Collection
Phase I
Pilot test with four focus groups comprised of 21 individuals across five
(completed in 2020)
Directorates and Offices
Phase II
15 focus groups comprised of 72 individuals across seven NSF units (five
(completed all data
Directorates and two Offices)
collection by Spring 2021)
Phase III
12 focus groups, including seven comprised of 27 individuals from two NSF
(completed in Summer
units (one Directorate and one Office), and five additional theme four-specific
2021)
focus groups comprised of nine individuals from five Directorates
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
12
Collecting Data
Data for this assessment were collected through focus groups and
supporting artifacts:
Focus groups. By relying on focus groups, NSF sought to
(1) maximize valuable, balanced insights through robust dialogue;
(2) minimize burden on participating Directorates and Offices;
(3) enable probing to ensure a common understanding of key
terminology; and (4) develop an approach that can be replicated as
part of a cycle of recurring assessments to monitor progress.
Through the focus groups, the assessment team gathered insights
related to the current state of people, process, and infrastructure
capabilities from representatives of each participating Directorate
and Office. To doso, facilitators asked questions to walk participants
through the set of capabilities that comprise the dimensions and
themes of the framework and prompt participants to discuss their
presence or absence, relative maturity, roadblocks to increasing
maturity, and ideas for improvement.
Focus group meetings lasted approximately 90 minutes and
included three to eight participants in each group. Participants
generally joined one of three groups designed for:
Raw data managers, such as individuals that collect, store,
protect, and document data
Curated data users, such as individuals who use data to produce
results or inform decisions
Evidence generators and users, such as individuals completing
studies in NSF's learning agenda, disseminating findings
(internally or externally), or using them for decisions
Some Directorates and Offices elected to have individuals
participate in more than one focus group when their job duties
spanned multiple roles. Directorate and Office leadership generally
joined the evidence generators and users focus group.
Milky Way in winter night sky near McMurdo Station
Credit: Joshua Swanson
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
13
Artifacts. To support assertions regarding capabilities, participants were
given the opportunity to provide artifacts-that is, documentation reflecting
capabilities in practice. Artifacts include standards, policies, standard operating
procedures (SOPs), job aids, and other written materials of varying levels of
formality. The assessment team provided each participating NSF Directorate
and Office with a list of artifacts of interest at the assessment kickoff meeting
and, for the duration of data collection, accepted additional documentation
arising from the focus groups. For example, during focus group meetings, if
individuals referred to a standard approach to data or metadata management,
the assessment team requested a copy of the SOP outlining that approach.
The assessment team's review of these artifacts provided an important source
of information for analysis.
Gentoo penguin leaping off ice flow into Mikkelsen Harbor
Credit: Kelton W. McMahon, Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
14
Using butterfly wing color patterns to study genotype-phenotype relationships
Credit: Riccardo Papa, Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico
Assigning Maturity Ratings
The assessment team developed a six-point scale to rate capabilities based on current state maturity, relying on
the contractor team's knowledge of industry data maturity standards and approaches in use by other maturity
models and other agencies. The scale provides ratings ranging from Not Initiated to Optimizing (Exhibit 3).
Exhibit 3 - NSF Organizational Capacity Assessment Maturity Scale
Maturity
Rating
Characteristics
Optimizing
People, process, or technology capabilities are fully embedded into the operational
5.50 - 6.00
culture of the organization with a mechanism for continuous improvement.
Performing
4.50 5.49
People, process, or technology capabilities are expected by the organization and
are monitored using defined metrics.
Piloting
People, process, or technology capabilities have been established based on best
3.50 - 4.49
practices but are not widely accepted or used.
Defining
Planning and/or activities to define the people, process, or technology capabilities
2.50 3.49
are underway, or capabilities are being defined and validated with stakeholders.
Initiating
Issues being debated, use cases being discussed, and/or ad hoc activities being
1.50 2.49
performed related to people, process, or technology capabilities.
Not
No evidence of issues being debated, use cases being discussed, or ad hoc activities
Initiated
1.00 - 1.49
being performed related to people, process, or technology capabilities.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
15
Each Directorate/Office received a maturity rating for each capability based on an analysis of focus group
discussions and a review of relevant artifacts. Capability-level maturity ratings were averaged to produce ratings
at the dimension and theme levels. Multi-level maturity ratings facilitate identification and prioritization of both
broad areas of focus and specific targets for improvement to drive increased maturity.
The assessment team provided a briefing to each participating Directorate/Office to walk through the assessment
ratings and discuss some of the key observations supporting the ratings. These briefings gave participants an
opportunity to provide feedback and begin discussing potential next steps to act on assessment findings within
their respective Directorate/Office.
Finding the cause of the little Ice age
Credit: Gifford H. Miller, INSTAAR, University of Colorado Boulder
Quality Assurance Approach
The assessment includes a quality assurance approach that leverages quality reviews, socialization activities, and a
strong partnership between NSF and contractor teams. Quality assurance activities include:
Building data validation checks into assessment tools and templates
Completing multiple levels of review to integrate subject matter expertise and verify alignment with agency
quality standards
Obtaining iterative feedback on work products from key stakeholders (e.g., NSF assessment team members,
Directorate/Office liaisons)
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
16
C. Enterprise-Level Findings
Key Takeaways
Exhibit 4 presents high-level findings that highlight strengths and opportunities for improvement. These
findings are supported by the detailed assessment results summarized below.
Exhibit 4 - Key Takeaways from NSF's Organizational Capacity Assessment
Drawing on its culture, which values data, will help NSF mature data capabilities and
promote increased use of evidence in decision-making
Establishing procedures and standards in areas such as documentation, quality reviews,
and change management will enable easier access to data and tools, promote consistency
across the agency, and facilitate analysis and tools development to generate reliable findings
Improving alignment of data architecture and goals for increased reliance on data will
enable more flexible and independent data integration, analysis, and analytics tools development
Developing an NSF data skills training plan or guidance on data-related training will
help align upskilling efforts with NSF's vision for future data capabilities
Filling gaps in guidance for accessing and using data will decrease the learning curve and
help staff work more efficiently (examples: data access and quality procedures, tools rollout and
change management, analysis documentation)
Helicopter transporting fossil specimen in Antarctica
Credit: Eva Koppelhus
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
17
Enterprise-Level Maturity Ratings
The three data collection phases of the organizational capacity assessment resulted in an enterprise-level view
of maturity at the dimension and theme levels (Exhibit 5). These enterprise-level maturity ratings represent
unweighted averages of capability ratings across participating NSF Directorates and Offices.
Exhibit 5 - NSF Maturity Ratings by Dimension
Theme 4: Assessing & Improving Capacity
Theme 1: Building a Culture That
or Generating & Using Evidence
Values Data & Promotes Public Use
Defining 2.96
Data Personnel
Defining 3.07
Agency Appropriately Supports
Evidence Generation & Use
Data Culture
5
4
Ongoing Studies Generate
Data Governance
High-Value Evidence
3
2
1
Data Protection
Data Access
Data Operations
Analytics Capabilities
Data|Inventory
Platforms & Architecture
Data Quality
Theme 3: Promoting Efficient
Theme 2: Governing, Managing,
& Appropriate Data Use
& Protecting Data
Defining 3.27
Defining 2.78
At each maturity level, people, process, or technology capabilities are
Objectivity and Independence
Optimizing
fully embedded and
This assessment was designed and
5.50 - 6.00
continuously improved.
implemented by a team that included NSF
Performing
expected, monitored, and widely
staff and contractors. NSF staff ensured
4.50 - 5.49 -
used.
that the assessment was tailored to meet
Piloting
NSF needs and that appropriate staff (in
3.50 - 4.49 -
functioning in some parts
of the team/organization.
target roles or positions) were identified for
Defining
participation. To ensure that the findings
2.50 - 3.49
.being planned, formalized,
reported are free of bias, and therefore
and/or validated.
uphold the principle of objectivity and
Initiating
...under discussion or performed
independence in NSF's Evaluation Policy,
1.50 - 2.49
only on an ad hoc basis.
the analysis of data collected and the
Not Initiated
development of maturity ratings were
not defined or in place.
1.00 - 1.49 -
conducted by contractor staff without any
NSF involvement.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
18
NSF operates mostly in the middle (defining and piloting) stages of data and evidence maturity across the
dimensions (Exhibit 5). However, these average ratings conceal large variation across Directorates and
Offices (Exhibit 6). The variability in ratings reveals pockets of excellence and nnovation-Directorate and
Offices across NSF supporting the design, development, pilot testing, deployment, and use of data analytics
and studies to generate useful evidence for decision-making. These efforts may provide a good foundation
to develop a strategy for improvements.
Exhibit 6 - Variability of Maturity Ratings, by Dimension
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
supports & (Use
210000
&
3.1
4.1
Reading the chart
The length of the box represents the distance between the lower and upper quartiles.
The solid line in the box marks the median value.
The dashed line marks the average.
The "whiskers" represent minimums and maximums (unless there is an outlier).
The open dot represents an outlier, a data point that is more than 1.5 times the length of the box away from its respective
quartile.
Note: A box with no whiskers or outliers means the lower and/or upper quartile is equal to the minimum and/or maximum.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
19
Theme-Level Observations
Below are highlighted observations currently under discussion within the agency.
Theme 1
Building a Culture that Values Data and Promotes Public Use
Leadership sets a strong tone at the top on data-driven decision-making.
Directorates and Offices are energized about data and analytics.
Leadership is aware of the need to build data skills capacity strategically.
Data skills training plans are informal or ad hoc.
There is room to improve training and guidance on use of available data and tools.
Theme 2
Governing, Managing, and Protecting Data
Agency has active engagement in enterprise-level data governance groups.
Many data tools are available to staff, but adoption is uneven at present.
Many staff members only interact with data policies and standards during NSF annual training courses.
Requirements for and feedback on new Directorate- and Office-level data assets and analyses are
inconsistent or ad hoc.
Staff take initiative on data quality checks; most data quality checks are ad hoc and completed manually.
Theme 3
Promoting Efficient and Appropriate Data Use
NSF fosters innovation and collaboration through a robust set of learning communities to support
informal mentoring and training.
Teams actively balance privacy considerations and opportunities for external dissemination.
Most teams have a few skilled data practitioners; leadership acknowledges the need to broaden base
of data analytics skills.
Agency-level approach to tiered access (a security model with trust tiers that determine access) has not
been applied to Directorate/Office-leve data assets in a consistent manner.
Theme 4
Generating Evidence and Supporting Evidence Generation and Use
Agency developed an inventory of ongoing evaluation and analysis activities.
Agency is working to increase the value of generating evidence through identifying, prioritizing,
completing, and considering results of evidence-generating activities in a more formal and consistent
manner.
Capacity is a limiting factor in the ability to engage in evidence generation and use.
Leadership is vocal about supporting evidence-related activities but aligning resources with goals is a
challenge.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
20
Conclusions
The organizational assessment demonstrates NSF's commitment to data maturity and evidence generation
and use. Although NSF has a strong data culture and staff with strong analytical capabilities, the enterprise-
level ratings indicate several areas for improvements. NSF is already encouraging the development of
strategies and prioritization of improvements to increase data maturity and evidence generation and use (as
explained in the Next Steps section).
Linking Key Observations to Capacity Assessment Requirements
Below are selected examples of insights aligned with Capacity Assessment requirements.
Considering the extent to which NSF's "evaluations, research and analysis efforts, and related activities" are
Use of evidence in decision-making appears to be highly valued and
supported by leadership; supervisors and leaders expect team members
to participate in evidence-related activities and use available evidence to
Supporting and balancing
support decision-making wherever possible.
agency needs
Teams view NSF's annual strategic review process as an effective
mechanism to obtain deeper insights into leadership priorities and
identify research topics for the year.
There is high interest across the agency in upskilling on evidence
generation and use.
Using appropriate
methodologies
Agency should consider identifying and further publicizing existing
trainings (internal and external) to enable agency staff to learn more
about evidence generation methods and responsible use of evidence.
Determining current agency capacity for
Planning and implementing
There are currently limited staff within Directorates/Offices who have the
evaluation activities,
requisite time and expertise to support evidence generation activities.
disseminating best practices
and findings, and incorporating
Some assessment participants were either unaware of, or unfamiliar
employee views and feedback
with, NSF guidance on evidence-related activities.
Assessment participants noted that their teams need additional staff to
Carrying out capacity-building
support demand for evaluation, research, and analysis in support of the
activities in order to use
mission.
evaluation research and analysis
approaches and data in the day-
NSF may want to consider assessing its current resource capacity and
to-day operations
conducting a gap analysis to identify and prioritize the gaps in key
evidence-related capabilities.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
21
Section 2
Analysis of NSF's Inventory of
Evidence-Building Activities
Per the Evidence Act, this section summarizes NSF's "assessment of the coverage,
quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of the statistics, evaluation,
research, and analysis efforts of the agency."
Researchers in Puerto Rico study butterfly wing colors to understand genotype-phenotype connections
Credit: Riccardo Papa, Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico
A. Methodology
As required by the Evidence Act, NSF's inventory of evidence-building activities includes "statistics, evaluation,
research, and analysis" activities ongoing in FY 2021 (Exhibit 7). These include activities active between October
2020 (the beginning of the fiscal year) and April 2021, when data collection for this analysis was conducted.
When appropriate, throughout this document, we use the terms "activities" and "studies" interchangeably to
refer to these evidence-building activities.
Exhibit 7 - Activities included in and excluded from NSF's inventory of evidence-building efforts
Included
Excluded
Evidence-building activities focused on NSF
Activities not focused on NSF, not controlled by NSF, or
decisions and investments
that form part of regular operations
Evaluation of an NSF program, policy, strategy,
NSF grant-funded activities that are not focused on
initiative, or operations
NSF's programs, operations or work
Statistics, such as the funding rate, at any level
Activities not focused on NSF, such as state-of-the-
(e.g., agency, directorate, division, program)
field reviews and nationally representative statistical
surveys
Research, including landscaping studies and
literature reviews
Grants/cooperative agreement project-level
evaluations where NSF has no direct control over the
Analysis, such as desk reviews to create logic
execution of the work
models, workforce analyses, and Committee of
Visitors' reports
Routine operational activities, including risk and
budget analyses
Rufous hummingbird
Credit: Sarah Frey, Oregon State University
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
23
Data Sources
Data for this initial inventory were collected from existing sources:
Yearly data call to NSF Directorates and Offices in support of the preparation of the annual budget request
EAC supported projects (evaluations and other types of evidence-building activities)
Approved OMB Paperwork Reduction Act information collection requests
Active NSF grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts in support of evidence-building activities
And verified by:
EAC liaisons at NSF Directorates and Offices. A list of activities verified to date is presented in Appendix B.
Document Review
For each study or activity, existing documentation was collected and reviewed to code each activity along
the dimensions shown below, as NSF aligned the Evidence Act requirements with the principles in NSF's
Evaluation Policy. For example, the required assessment of using "methods and combinations of methods
that are appropriate to the corresponding research questions being addressed" is aligned with the NSF
principle of high quality and rigor. Appendix A provides a detailed description of this alignment.
Documentation reviewed included, when available, statements of work, project plans, work plans, analysis
plans, quality assurance plans, dissemination plans, and information collection request packages. These
enabled NSF to assess the following characteristics through a desk review of documents (constraints are
discussed in the limitations section below):
9
characteristics of relevance and utility
These characteristics focus on classifying activities by typology, focus, stakeholders, and use.
characteristics of high quality and rigor
These measure the design and execution of the activity, considering the balance of needs.
1
characteristic of independence and objectivity
This characteristic reflects our assessment of insulation from undue influence.
5
characteristics of transparency and reproducibility
Afocus on transparency and reproducibility signals a commitment to quality, replication, and dissemination.
1
characteristic of ethics
This indicates compliance with applicable federal laws as well as protection of human subjects.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
24
Limitations
The Evidence Act requirements for this analysis are ambitious. In particular, the constructs of interest
as aligned with the NSF Evaluation Principles-such as utility and ethics-are difficult to measure. This is
particularly true for the "current" efforts that are the target of this analysis as stipulated in the Evidence
Act. For example, it is difficult to assess ethical conduct or level of rigor of work that is in the design or
exploratory phases. And even if measured, these may change over time. In addition, for this first response
to these requirements, NSF sought to rely on existing data sources to avoid developing an approach that
increased burden on stakeholders. This necessarily generated some limitations in the depth of information
available, as the analysis relies heavily on original plans (available through proposals or work plans for
studies conducted), instead of final reports. For these reasons, the coding schemes created for analysis
are constrained in their ability to measure the target characteristics of ongoing evidence-building activities.
Ethics-for instance-is reduced to one data point. Albeit an important one-compliance with legislation
and human subject protections as documented in requests for clearance-this measure fails to capture
other agency efforts to promote ethical conduct, such as well-enforced procedures to identify conflicts of
interest. The methodological approach adopted for this analysis aimed to balance several factors, such as
the resources invested, burden generated, reproducibility over time, and potential utility of the findings. This
valuable initial experience will provide a solid foundation to consider revisions in the future as NSF seeks to
monitor its portfolio of evidence-building activities.
Quality Assurance
The design of this analysis, the coding schemes developed, and the estimates generated were submitted
to quality assurance review by independent researchers (that is, researchers not involved in the design or
analysis) with appropriate technical expertise, extensive research experience, and knowledge of the Evidence
Act. The first review focused on (1) alignment of the analytic approach (including the coding schemes) with
the Evidence Act requirements and (2) assessment of a sample of documents for agreement with the codes
assigned to them. This quality assurance review found agreement across all constructs except for one: degree
of rigor. Upon review, staff concluded that many activities were too new for degree of methodological rigor to
be determined with high reliability. As a result, this dimension was excluded. Instead, the measure of degree
of
rigor focused only on the alignment between the proposed methodology and the research question(s).
The second review focused on reproducing all estimates reported here for accuracy. They were all verified.
Sunrise over the Arctic
Credit: Kim Kenny
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
25
B. Findings
Inventory
NSF's inventory of evidence-building activities includes:
39
activities spanning
Directorates and Offices
25
External contracts
12
Internal efforts
2
Grants and cooperative agreements
The sections below provide an analysis of the characteristics of these efforts along the required dimensions
and aligned with the NSF Evaluation Policy Principles.
Relevance and utility
Current evidence-building activities support most Directorates and Offices at NSF, particularly the Office
of the Director (OD). Ongoing activities support the needs of 8 of 9 Directorates and Offices. Nearly three
quarters of the studies originate in three units-namely, the Office of the Director (44 percent) and the
Directorates for Education and Human Resources (15 percent) and Engineering (13 percent) (Exhibit 8).
This is to be expected, as the Office of the Director is home to several offices and focuses on work that is
of value agencywide, which is a criterion for prioritizing evidence-building efforts. Similarly, the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources is a hub for agency initiatives to grow and diversify the workforce;
monitoring and evaluating these initiatives has been a longstanding agency priority.
Exhibit 8 - Distribution of FY 2021 evidence-building activities by Directorates and Offices
GEO, 8%
OIRM,
5%
SBE, 5%
CISE,
OD, 44%
EHR, 15%
ENG, 13%
BFA, 5%
BIO, 3%
3%
Source: NSF analysis of its FY 2021 inventory of evidence-building activities.
Notes: N=39. OD=Office of the Director, EHR = Directorate for Education and Human Resources, ENG=Directorate for Engineering,
GEO=Directorate for Geosciences, BFA= Office of Budget, Finance and Award Management, OIRM = Office of Information and
Resource Management, SBE = Directorate for Social Behavioral and Economic Sciences, BIO = Directorate for Biological Sciences,
CISE = Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering. Percentages in graphics add up to more than 100
percent due to rounding.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
26
The studies in NSF's portfolio of evidence-building activities address a variety of questions related
to the agency's mission and operations. Some questions focus on the efficacy of agency policies and
programs (such as NSF's Anti-Harassment Conference Policy and the Convergence Accelerator program),
others focus on describing activities (such as the prevalence and characteristics of projects related to
nanotechnology), and yet others focus on people (for example, on counting and describing the demographic
characteristics and educational and employment outcomes of participants in NSF programs). Questions
about agency operations often focus on improving service delivery (a good example is whether removing
proposal deadlines reduces proposals' dwell time, on average).
The agency's mission drives evidence-building activities at NSF. Most studies (33 studies or 85 percent)
support mission-strategic research, with 27 focused on programs and 6 focused on policy (not shown in
graphs for simplicity). The remaining evidence-building efforts (6 or 15 percent) are focused on operations,
such as statistics on funding rates. Analyzing these studies by areas of focus highlighted in the Evidence
Act and shown in Exhibit 9 shows that these efforts address a wide range of needs. The most common
needs relate to agency performance management (ongoing program management, strategic management,
organizational learning, and performance management).
Exhibit 9 - Distribution of activities highlighted in the Evidence Act
Ongoing Program Management
Strategic Management
Organizational Learning
Performance Management
Internal and External Oversight
Accountability
Interagency and Private Sector Coordination
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Source: NSF analysis of its FY 2021 inventory of evidence-building activities
Note: N=39.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
27
Most current efforts are foundational fact-finding studies, that is, research and analysis efforts
that are mostly descriptive or exploratory. Current studies were coded using two different typologies
- one included in the Evidence Act itself and the other in OMB guidance (OMB M-19-23). Using the Evidence
Act typology, evaluations and statistics make up 39 percent of the reported activities (see Exhibit 10, left
graph). Research and other types of analyses make up the remainder. Using the classification defined in
OMB M-19-23, the majority of activities (59 percent) are foundational fact finding while program evaluation
and performance measurement account for 18 percent each. The remaining two studies are policy analyses
(5 percent) (see Exhibit 10, right graph). Of the evaluations included in either typology, four are summative
evaluations and one is a formative evaluation.
Exhibit 10 - Characteristics of activities
Evidence Act Typology
M-19-23 Typology
Program
Evaluation 1
Statistics 2
Evaluation
Performance
Measurement
18%
21%
18%
18%
Policy
Analysis
5%
21%
41%
59%
Foundational
Research 3
Other Analysis
4
Fact Finding
Source: NSF analysis of its FY 2021 inventory of evidence-building activities
Notes: N=39 for each graph. Values may not add to 100% due to rounding.
1
Evaluations are systematic assessments of the effectiveness or efficiency of programs, policies,
strategies, or organizations. Example: Evaluating the Sustainability of the NSF ADVANCE Program.
2
Statistics includes work focused on providing statistical estimates and do not contain
in-depth analysis and conclusions found in evaluation or research studies. Example: National
Nanotechnology Initiative Program Analysis.
3
Research includes studies that seek to answer a research question(s) but are not evaluations.
Example: Merit Review Survey.
4 Other types of analyses include desk reviews to create logic models, workforce analyses, and
portfolio reviews by Committee of Visitors. Many of these projects are exploratory analyses that
provide background information for future evaluations. Example: Geoscience Education and
Diversity Programs Committee of Visitors.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
28
Regardless of the program or NSF unit originating the study, findings are likely to be useful across
the Foundation. Evidence-building activities may be designed to produce evidence that applies to:
A single stakeholder - for example, a single program, such as the Centers for Chemical Innovation
Program, or division, such as Committee of Visitor portfolio reviews
Multiple stakeholders - for example, an intervention that is implemented across multiple
directorates, such as the Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program
The agency as a whole - such as policies that apply across the Foundation
The review of current activities revealed that, at the planning stage, most of them (62 percent) were focused
solely on the stakeholder commissioning the study, a small share (5 percent) on multiple stakeholders, and
a third (33 percent) on agencywide efforts (Exhibit 11). This finding aligns with the earlier one indicating that
nearly half of the studies are initiated by the Office of the Director.
However, even if a study is commissioned by or conducted for a single stakeholder, findings may be relevant
across the Foundation. Coded as the potential relevance of each evidence-building activity based on topic or
programmatic overlaps, the results suggest that ongoing studies may indeed generate findings that would
be useful to multiple stakeholders. For example, the evaluation of an innovation training program may be
commissioned in response to the needs of one program, but results may be potentially useful for other
programs related to technology transfer. Coding and analyzing potential relevance suggests that 42 percent
of the evidence-building activities originated by single stakeholders (10 of 24) may be relevant to multiple
stakeholders or the entire Foundation (Exhibit 11). Consequently, nearly 60 percent of ongoing studies will
potentially benefit multiple agency stakeholders, including programs, divisions, and directorates. This finding
underscores the value of single stakeholder initiatives and the importance of dissemination activities.
Exhibit 11 - Relevance of activity to stakeholder groups
The left-hand vertical axis shows the distribution of the planned relevance of the current activities. The right-
hand vertical axis shows how this distribution changes if results are shared with other relevant stakeholders.
n=13
agencywide
agencywide
n=13
Source: NSF analysis of its FY 2021
inventory of evidence-building
activities.
n=2
multiple stakeholders
multiple stakeholders
n=2
A single stakeholder activity is
agencywide
n=1
defined as relevant to a single
program, for example, the Secure
and Trustworthy Cyberspace
Program, or division, such as
multiple stakeholders
n=9
Committee of Visitor portfolio
reviews. A multiple stakeholder
activity is a specific type of
intervention that is replicated
n=24
single stakeholder
across multiple units at NSF, such
as the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Program (REU).
single stakeholder
n=14
Agencywide activities focus on
topics relevant to the entire
Agency, such as anti-harassment
policies that apply across the
Foundation.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
29
High quality and rigor
Most current NSF studies are non-experimental and often rely on descriptive analyses.
The characteristics of evidence-building activities pursued (say, an impact versus a descriptive study) will vary
based on the goals, available time, resources, and data needed. Analysis of current NSF studies revealed
that, in FY 2021, most (37 out of 39, or 95 percent) are non-experimental, meaning that they do not seek to
establish causal relationships (Exhibit 12). More specifically, among current studies:
Nearly half are descriptive analyses
Nearly one third are systematic reviews
One study is quasi-experimental (to estimate impacts) and two use benchmarking (to contextualize
estimates)
The remaining are correlation analyses and reviews of the literature
Studies use methodologies that are well-aligned with the research questions. Two-thirds of current
studies rely solely on either quantitative methods (49 percent) or qualitative methods (18 percent). The
remaining third (31 percent) use both qualitative and quantitative methods. (One study is in the design
phase and does not yet have a confirmed methodology.) Most importantly, nearly all studies (90 percent)
use methodologies that are appropriate and sufficiently rigorous for answering the given questions. For
example, an analysis of partnerships seeks to describe the types and prevalence of partnerships in projects
and programs across the Foundation. This study appropriately uses a non-experimental approach and
a descriptive methodology. Another study is a formative evaluation that seeks to establish participant
demographic characteristics and education and workforce outcomes compared to benchmarks of interest.
To answer this question, a non-experimental approach with benchmarking is being employed.
Exhibit 12 - Methodologies of evidence-building activities
Quasi-Experimental
Causal Analysis
3%
Benchmarking Studies
5%
Correlational Analyses
10%
Not Experimental
Descriptive Analyses
49%
Systematic Reviews
28%
Literature Reviews
3%
Not Determined Yet
3%
Source: NSF analysis of its FY 2021 inventory of evidence-building activities
Notes: N=39. One study is in the planning phase and exact methods have not been determined. Percentages do not
add to 100 due to rounding.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
30
Nearly half of FY 2021 NSF studies have quality assurance plans in place. The last measure used to
assess (potential for) high quality was the existence of documented quality assurance plans, which nearly
half of the studies (18 or 46 percent) had. The absence of a quality assurance plan does not necessarily imply
that the given effort will not be subjected to quality assurance (this report is illustration of that fact), but
does increase the risk that such reviews may be overlooked. This is an area where developing agencywide
guidance may help, as suggested by findings of the organizational capacity assessment.
Independence and objectivity
Independence and objectivity are influential factors in deciding whether studies are conducted
internally or externally. NSF strives to ensure the credibility and usefulness of its evidence-building
activities. To this end, many factors are considered when planning a study. These include availability of staff
with relevant expertise and without conflicts of interest; access to data; security and privacy; and available
financial resources. In FY 2021, consideration of these factors resulted in a portfolio of studies that are
mostly being conducted externally (31 or 79 percent), with close oversight from NSF staff. The remaining
evidence-building activities are being conducted internally by staff with appropriate expertise (such as, social
scientists, science analysts, or data analytics officers) either in the NSF units interested in the results or in
other units that can provide expert support with independence and objectivity. For example, the analysis
of partnerships, which requires a deep understanding of NSF data systems, is being conducted internally by
staff that are not otherwise involved in NSF's portfolio of partnership projects or programs. In contrast, the
evaluation of NSF's agencywide harassment prevention efforts is being conducted externally.
Transparency and reproducibility
About half of current studies have written plans to disseminate findings and data. A commitment
to disseminating findings and data (with supporting documentation) to appropriate audiences signals
transparency and supports reproducibility. One way to assess this commitment in current studies is
to measure whether these studies have written dissemination plans. Such plans state expectations for
release, identify target audiences, and provide other relevant information, such as the expected timeline
and documentation to be released. These plans are influenced by many factors, particularly privacy and
security concerns. About half of the FY 2021 studies (20 or 51 percent) have a written dissemination plan.
These include plans to release findings and data externally (3), internally (5), or a combination of both (12
dissemination plans include intended release of some findings internally only and others externally as well)
(Exhibit 13). Almost a quarter (9 or 23 percent) of these plans included the production of documents to
support reproducibility. The absence of a dissemination plan does not necessarily imply that findings or data
will not be released, but it may signal that plans for such release are not being prioritized early on as they
may depend on the usefulness of the findings and/or the quality of the data collected. The advent of the
learning agenda may help promote the development of dissemination plans, as conversations regarding use
and dissemination are taking place in the very early stages of developing learning agenda questions.
1
One activity is still in the planning stages.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
31
Exhibit 13 - Target audiences of dissemination plans
External
Audiences
8%
Internal
13%
Audiences
No
49%
Dissemination
Plan
31%
External
and Internal
Audiences
Source: NSF analysis of its FY 2021 inventory of evidence-building activities
Note: N=39. The "no dissemination plan" category includes one study that is too nascent to have a plan in place.
Ethics
NSF is complying with an important legislative mechanism to promote the protection of human
subjects and reduction of burden on the public (in addition to the utility of data collections). One aspect
of ethics that is measurable is compliance with federal laws and regulations, in particular the Paperwork
Reduction Act (PRA) which governs many evidence-building activities. More than a third of NSF's FY 2021
evidence-building activities (36 percent) are subject to PRA OMB approval. These either have received
OMB clearance for their data collection activities (10 or 26 percent) or have documented plans to submit
information collection requests to OMB (4 or 10 percent).
Conclusions
Consistent with the results of the organizational assessment, the analysis of the inventory of NSF's FY
2021 studies demonstrates the Foundation's commitment to evidence-building activities. These activities
are designed to meet a wide range of agency needs, from rigorous program evaluations to exploratory
policy analysis, and use methods that are well aligned with their research questions. Consequently, they are
often and appropriately non-experimental. As NSF leverages the yearly development of learning agendas
engaging staff across the agency and external stakeholders, the balance of technical approaches is likely
to change, particularly in favor of studies that support causal inferences and include quality assurance and
dissemination plans.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
32
Next Steps
Aurora Australis over Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station
Credit: Patrick Cullis; Source: U.S. Antarctic Program photo Library
NSF has begun disseminating the capacity assessment results to staff across the agency, starting with the
agency's Leadership Team and the EAC Coordination Group, which is comprised of representatives from every
unit at NSF. Based on findings and consultations with leadership and staff, NSF is developing a draft strategy
to drive improvements and increase maturity levels over the next few years. This strategy will establish areas
of short- versus long-term focus, improvement targets, timelines, and initiatives to close gaps between actual
and target maturity levels.
Over FY 2022-FY 2023, NSF will focus on data governance, protections, operations, and personnel. Actions
in these areas range from policy development (such as a data quality policy) to guidance (on topics such as
non-response bias analysis) to hands-on trainings to upskill staff (such as a tailored training with NSF
administrative data to leverage text analytics and external data for monitoring and evaluation). NSF will consider
expanding the capacity assessment in FY 2023 to highlight the areas of statistics, evaluation, research and
analysis. NSF will also update the improvement strategy for FY 2024-FY 2025. To ensure a successful
expansion, the assessment team has documented the methodological approach and, as the final step
of this assessment, will be designing the next one.
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
33
Appendix A - Requirements Coverage
The table below shows the alignment between the Capacity Assessment requirements of Title | of the Evidence
Act and the two components of NSF's Capacity Assessment.
Evaluation
Organizational
Activity
Evidence Act
Evidence Act Requirements
Policy
Capacity
Capacity
Requirements (9A-D)
(4 evidence types & 5 criteria)
Principles
Assessment
Assessment
Statistics
A list of activities and
operations of the agency that
Evaluations
are currently being evaluated
Research
and analyzed (9)(A)
Analysis
The extent to which the
Coverage: Relevance
evaluations, research, and
analysis efforts and related
activities support the needs of
Coverage: Utility
divisions within the agency (9)(B)
The extent to which the
evaluations, research, and
Relevance & Utility
analysis efforts and related
activities address an appropriate
balance of needs for learning
Coverage: Balance of Needs
and management, performance
and strategic management,
interagency and private sector
coordination, and oversight and
accountability (9)(C)
Quality/Methods: Methodological Fit
The extent to which the agency
uses methods and combinations
Quality/Methods: Methodological Rigor
High Quality & Rigor
of methods that are appropriate
to agency divisions and the
Quality/Methods: Quality Assurance
corresponding research
Independence and Objectivity
questions being addressed (9)(D)
Independence and
Objectivity/Transparency
Independence and Objectivity:
and Reproducibility
Reproducibility
Effectiveness: Dissemination
Transparency and
The extent to which evaluation
Reproducibility
and research capacity is present
Ethics: Research Conduct
Ethics
within the agency to include
personnel and agency processes
Effectiveness (supply): Evidence
for planning and implementing
Builders and Brokers/Translators
evaluation activities,
disseminating best practices
Effectiveness (demand): Evidence Users
and findings, and incorporating
Capacity for Effectiveness: Infrastructure
employee views and feedback
(9)(E)
Capacity for Effectiveness: Policies,
procedures, practices
The extent to which the agency
Capacity for Effectiveness: Culture
has the capacity to assist agency
staff and program offices to
develop the capacity to use
Capacity for Effectiveness: Funding
evaluation research and analysis
approaches and data in the
Capacity for Effectiveness:
day-to-day operations (9)(F)
Leadership Support
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
34
Appendix B - List of Evidence-Building Activities
The list below displays NSF's "statistics, evaluation, research, and analysis" activities ongoing between October 2020
and April 2021, when data collection for this analysis was conducted.
Anti-Harassment Conference Policy Evaluation
Anti-Harassment Term and Condition Study
Assessing LSAMP Two-Year College Activities Through Analysis of National Student Clearinghouse Data
Board on International Scientific Organizations (BISO) Theory of Change
Capacity Assessment Inventory
Convergence Accelerator Participant Surveys
Customer Satisfaction Survey for the NSF Electronic Research Administration Forum
Data Analytic and Assurance Services (Organizational Assessment)
Data Collection and Analytic & Technical Support Services
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary Activities Committee of Visitors
Division of Biological Infrastructure Committee of Visitors
Division of Earth Sciences Committee of Visitors
Division of Human Resource Development Committee of Visitors
Education and Training Application (ETAP)
Evaluating the Sustainability of the NSF Advance Program
Evaluation of Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation - Research Experience and Mentoring Program
Evaluation of NSF's Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
Evaluation of the Convergence Accelerator
Evaluation Support Services for the NSF INCLUDES Initiative
Exploration of Partnerships
Exploring Convergence Research: An Initial Examination of What It Means and What It Hopes To Accomplish
Geoscience Education and Diversity Programs Committee of Visitors
Graduate Research Fellowship Program Pilot Data Collection
I-Corps: Virtual Training, Evaluation, and Tracking of Program Impact
Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Program Annual Report
Linking of the SDR To the NSF Grants Database
Marketing/Outreach Survey: NSF SBIR/STTR Program
Merit Review Analyses and Assessment (PI and Reviewer Survey)
Merit Review Report (Funding Rates)
Minority-serving Institutions Report
National Nanotechnology Initiative Program Analysis
NSF Audience Survey
NSF International Research Experiences for Undergraduates: A Comparative Analysis of the IRES and REU Programs
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
35
NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program
PMIAA Workforce Development
Program-Level Database and Associated Support for Engineering Research Center (ERC) program in ENG/EEC and
Nanotechnology Science and Engineering Center (NSEC) Program
Proposal Panel Experiments
Recommendations For Enabling Earth Science Through NSF'S Geophysical Facility-A Portfolio Review of EAR
Seismology and Geodesy Instrumentation
Strategic Review of the "Missing Millions"
NSF
NSF Final Capacity Assessment
March 2022
36
NSF
National Science Foundation
www.nsf.gov
Iceberg in Rosita Harbor, South Georgia Island
Credit: Kelton W. McMahon, Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island
