"opm.capacity.assessments"
"1" "An official website of the United States government"
"2" "Here's how you know"
"3" " Official websites use .gov
A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States."
"4" " Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A lock (  LockA locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites."
"5" "Empowering Excellence in Government through Great People."
"6" "We lead and serve the Federal Government in enterprise human resources management by delivering policies and services to achieve a trusted effective civilian workforce."
"7" "Find out more about Federal compensation throughout your career and around the world."
"8" "Staffing to align with your agency's mission"
"9" "Review the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) Handbook"
"10" "Answering your questions about Healthcare and Insurance"
"11" "Manage your retirement online."
"12" "\"...The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall serve as the Suitability and Credentialing Agent...\" ~Executive Order 13467, as amended"
"13" "OPM’s Human Resources Solutions organization can help your agency answer this critically important question."
"14" "Developing senior leaders in the U.S. Government through Leadership for a Democratic Society, Custom Programs and Interagency Courses."
"15" "Visit this federal site to search for our regulatory notices, proposed and final rules."
"16" "See the latest tweets on our Twitter feed, like our Facebook pages, watch our YouTube videos, and page through our Flickr photos."
"17" "An official website of the United States government"
"18" "Here's how you know"
"19" " The .gov means it's official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site."
"20" " The site is secure.
The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely."
"21" "The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 requires agencies to “continually assess the coverage, quality, methods, consistency, effectiveness, independence, and balance of the portfolio of evaluations, policy research, and ongoing evaluation activities of the agency”[42]. A capacity assessment is an organizational requirement to assess the agency’s ability and infrastructure to generate and use evidence to better inform decisions and improve policies and services for its customers."
"22" "The capacity assessment must include:"
"23" "The assessment provides decision-makers “with information needed to improve the agency’s ability to support the development and use of evaluation, coordinate and increase technical expertise available for evaluation and related research activities within the agency, and improve the quality of evaluations and knowledge of evaluation methodology and standards.”[44]"
"24" "OPM’s capacity assessment focuses on 1) research, analysis, evaluation, and statistics activities undertaken by the agency; 2) the balance and appropriateness of OPM’s evidence activities; 3) the effectiveness of OPM’s evidence activities; and 4) agency capacity to generate and use evidence."
"25" "In assessing OPM’s research, analysis, statistics, and evaluation activities, the following dimensional attributes are considered:"
"26" "OPM collected or leveraged data from multiple sources to accomplish its objectives. These included:"
"27" "To design and implement these approaches, OPM engaged its Research Steering Committee, a group of key evidence generation leaders at OPM, as well as senior leaders, managers, and supervisors to provide input on the process and format of completing the capacity assessment and to respond to data requests and surveys."
"28" "To assess the types of evidence-building activities that are happening and where they are happening, OPM conducted a review of FY 2020-FY 2022 research analysis, statistical, and evaluation projects by office. The resulting inventory reflects the agency’s current ability to generate and use evidence to improve policies and services for its customers."
"29" "The purpose of the inventory is to identify and take stock of the different types of evidence that the agency is generating the different purposes that these projects serve."
"30" "The different types of evidence as specified by the Office of Management and Budget include foundational fact finding, policy analysis, performance management, and evaluation, as detailed below."
"31" ""
"32" "The evidence activities were classified by implementing office and type (excepting performance measurement, which was not covered in the review)."
"33" "OPM will use the inventory to identify opportunities to continue to build and use evidence that will support the agency’s achievement of its FY 2022-2026 strategic goals. Further, the inventory will help the agency to identify opportunities for intra-agency collaboration and cross-cutting learning and evidence-building activities."
"34" ""
"35" "Leadership Development"
"36" "Human Capital Data Management and Modernization"
"37" "Data Support and Analysis"
"38" " "
"39" "Telework Utilization Analysis. What are current utilization rates of telework? This analysis informs return to work planning."
"40" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"41" " "
"42" "Human Capital Data Management and Modernization"
"43" "Data Support and Analysis"
"44" "Equity Assessments. How do financial readiness and health plan selection vary by demographic group? These findings will inform the OPM equity assessments around financial readiness for retirement and Federal Employee Health Benefit plan selection."
"45" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"46" " "
"47" "Human Capital Data Management and Modernization"
"48" "Data Support and Analysis"
"49" "Retirement Dashboard. What are trends in retirement eligibility, types of retirement, and retirement demographics? The dashboard will be used to inform retirement services actions."
"50" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"51" " "
"52" "Merit Systems Accountability and Compliance"
"53" "Agency Compliance and Evaluation"
"54" "Human Capital Management Evaluations. Are agencies operating merit systems effectively, efficiently, and in compliance with regulations and veterans' preference law? The purpose of these evaluations is to (1) prescribe required corrective action; (2) recommend actions to improve effectiveness, efficiency, refer possible prohibited personnel practices and merit system violations to Office of Special Counsel; and (3) identify best practices to share with other agencies."
"55" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"56" "Merit Systems Accountability and Compliance"
"57" "Combined Federal Campaign (CFC)"
"58" "Three-Year Analysis of CFC Transactions and Applications. What is donor retention in CFC program? What is charity retention? The purpose of this analysis is to improve CFC marketing and charity recruitment. "
"59" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"60" "Suitability Executive Agent"
"61" " "
"62" "Full Program Reviews and Follow-up Reviews of Federal Agencies' Suitability Programs. To what extent is the suitability program of the agency achieving outcomes consistent with its delegated responsibilities? The findings identify areas of accomplishment and areas for improvement. A follow-up evaluation is conducted within one year of program evaluation to determine progress."
"63" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"64" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"65" "Health Systems Analysis"
"66" "Pharmacy Cost and Use Data Analysis. What are the patterns of pharmacy usage and cost under FEHB? The findings will be used for FEHB program administration."
"67" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"68" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"69" "Health Systems Analysis"
"70" "Formulary Analysis. What is the impact of formularies on FEHB program pharmacy benefits? The findings will be used for FEHB program administration."
"71" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"72" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"73" "Enrollment and Member Services"
"74" "Cost-Benefit Analysis for FEHB Central Enrollment Program. How do the cost of today’s FEHB enrollment and reconciliation process compare to the anticipated costs in a centralized environment? The findings will be used to inform program analysis, process improvements, and develop an acquisition strategy."
"75" "Policy Analysis"
"76" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"77" "Enrollment and Member Services"
"78" "Family Member Eligibility Educational Toolkits Process Evaluation. How are family member eligibility toolkits used and perceived? The findings will be used to assess how effective the tools are in educating and influencing enrollee behaviors."
"79" "Evaluation"
"80" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"81" "Enrollment and Member Services"
"82" "Enrollment Process Improvements Core Group. What is the current state of FEHB enrollment processing? How can we transform enrollment processing? The purpose is to identify deficiencies and duplication in current transaction processing and to identify and develop opportunities for centralizing the FEHB enrollment process."
"83" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"84" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"85" "Enrollment and Member Services"
"86" "Analysis of employee experiences and understanding of FEHB policy. How do federal employees learn about FEHB policy? How do they navigate enrollment decisions when HR is not on-site? What is their exposure to FEHB policy? The purpose is to assess the effectiveness of current resources and identify new opportunities to effectively educate federal employees on FEHB policy."
"87" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"88" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"89" "Enrollment and Member Services"
"90" "FEHB Family Member Audit. What percent of family members enrolled in FEHB are ineligible? The findings will be used to inform program analysis, for process improvement, to develop acquisition strategy, and to identify fraud, waste, and abuse."
"91" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"92" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"93" "Enrollment and Member Services"
"94" "FEHB Enrollment Data Analysis. What is the quality of FEHB electronic enrollment transaction data? Can we use the data to identify opportunities to refine FEHB enrollment data processes? The purpose is to analyze the quality of FEHB electronic enrollment transaction data for opportunities to refine enrollment data processes and the findings will be used to inform program analysis and process improvement."
"95" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"96" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"97" "Program Analysis and Development"
"98" "Automated Data Collection. How are FEHB carriers performing on certain topics and areas identified in the annual Call Letter? The Automated Data Collection collects information from FEHB carriers on topics and areas identified in the annual Call Letter to analyze adherence and performance related to health insurance. The collection informs future policy positions, content of future Call Letters and identifies areas of needed improvement for FEHB."
"99" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"100" "Healthcare and Insurance"
"101" "Systems Development and Implementation"
"102" "FEHB Master Enrollment Index. Can a more centralized enrollment information help streamline FEHB administration and improve carrier enrollment processing? The purpose of the index is to improve FEHB enrollment administration and reporting."
"103" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"104" "Office of the Chief Information Officer"
"105" "Information Technology"
"106" "IT Assessment. How can OCIO transform to effectively meet OPM's mission? The purpose of this analysis is to research project prioritization, funding allocations, process improvements, IT architecture improvements, staffing changes, and training."
"107" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"108" "Office of the Chief Information Officer"
"109" "Information Technology"
"110" "IT Architecture Review. What IT systems exist throughout OPM and what are their characteristics and interconnections? The purpose for this analysis is to research how OPM OCIO will staff to support technologies in use across all of OPM. "
"111" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"112" "Office of the Chief Financial Officer"
"113" "Financial Systems and Operations"
"114" "Joint Data Management Strategy. How will the financial data structure comply to OPM's reporting mandates once financial systems are migrated to Federal Shared Service Providers? This analysis will identify how the financial data structure will comply to OPM's reporting mandates once financial systems are migrated to Federal Shared Service Providers."
"115" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"116" "Office of Procurement Operations"
"117" "Acquisition Policy and Innovation"
"118" "Annual Value Engineering Efforts. Have OPM’s value engineering efforts reduced program and acquisition costs, improved performance, enhanced quality, or fostered the use of innovation? This annual report provides the fiscal year results of using Value Engineering annually to OMB’s Administrator for Federal Procurement Policy."
"119" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"120" "Office of Procurement Operations"
"121" "Acquisition Policy and Innovation"
"122" "Contracting Officer's Representative Development Program Survey. How can OPO assist contracting officer representatives (CORs) with performing their duties? The survey results will identify opportunities for OPO to assist Contracting Officer's Representatives with performing their duties."
"123" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"124" "Office of Procurement Operations"
"125" "Acquisition Policy and Innovation"
"126" "Requirements Design Studio. How can OPM make the requirements development process more efficient and effective? The purpose of this analysis is to research innovative methods and processes, and to develop and evaluate tools to improve the quality of procurement requirement information."
"127" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"128" "OPM Human Resources"
"129" "Talent Development"
"130" "Competency Exploration Development and Readiness Tool. What are OPM’s agency-specific skill gaps and how is OPM doing in mitigating these gaps? The findings will be used to support OPM's talent development efforts to upskill and reskill its workforce in alignment with the NAPA report recommendation to restore the agency’s reputation for human capital leadership, expertise, and service by redirecting the internal culture and rebuilding internal staff capacity."
"131" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"132" "OPM Human Resources"
"133" "Hiring Process"
"134" "FY 2021 Delegated Examining Evaluation: Accountability and Hiring Process. How effective and efficient is OPM’s internal hiring process from employee onboarding and new hire orientation? The findings will be used to make program and policy improvements related to OPM’s internal hiring process."
"135" "Evaluation"
"136" "OPM Human Resources"
"137" "Talent Management"
"138" "Future of Work/Flexible Work Arrangements Survey. What were OPM employees’ experiences during the pandemic and what are their preferences for flexible work arrangements and schedules and employee supports? These findings will be used to inform the development of OPM’s Future of Work Plan and program enhancements that address employee feedback."
"139" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"140" "OPM Human Resources"
"141" "Human Capital Analytics"
"142" "Human Capital Dashboard. What are trends in OPM demographics, hiring and attrition, and other human capital measures? This descriptive data provides OPM senior leadership with context to inform decision-making that impacts their organization’s workforce."
"143" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"144" "OPM Human Resources"
"145" "Performance Management"
"146" "Internal Audits of the Performance Management System. How effective are OPM’s awards and recognition programs? This data will be used to develop baseline measures for OPM’s performance management program, such as timeliness of recognition, utilization of various award types, and employee satisfaction and to determine common strengths and opportunities for improvement."
"147" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"148" "OPM Human Resources"
"149" "Employee Perceptions"
"150" "Exit Survey. How do exiting employees perceive OPM program/support areas and their work environment? These surveys are used to evaluate feedback on OPM and identify areas of improvement."
"151" "Foundational Fact Finding"
"152" "To assess whether there is an appropriate balance of evidence activities to address diverse organizational needs, OPM reviewed the balance of types of evidence activities currently being conducted or planned. Additionally, it leveraged data from the OPM internal survey and GAO’s Managing for Results survey to examine the extent to which types of evidence were needed and available for organizational use."
"153" "Of the 63 evidence activities identified in the review, 52 (83 percent) were classified as foundational fact finding, 7 (11 percent) were classified as policy analysis, and just 4 (6 percent) were classified as evaluation. Performance measurement was not included in the review, but OPM has a robust performance measurement process for strategic plan priorities, though performance information may be less utilized at the OPM office level. OPM’s largest imbalance is the dearth of evaluations of any type occurring at the agency; OPM’s FY 2022 annual evaluation plan currently included just one outcome evaluation. This is a critical area targeted for improvement."
"154" "The GAO survey also assessed availability of various evidence types for programs at OPM as compared to the federal government. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding data availability."
"155" "OPM outperformed the government in availability of all evidence types. OPM managers were most likely to report having performance information to a great or very great extent, but availability of other data types was much lower, and suggests a need for more access to evidence to inform programs."
"156" "OPM’s internal survey asked respondents to assess the extent to which their offices needed and conducted or leveraged evidence activities, by each activity."
"157" ""
"158" "To what extent evidence activities are needed Image Details"
"159" ""
"160" "To what extent evidence activities are conducted Image Details"
"161" "OPM’s survey corroborates the findings of the GAO survey. The findings show that OPM managers, supervisors, and senior leaders feel that there is a large need for research, analysis, evaluation, and statistics in their office, but that evidence activities are conducted at a lesser extent than the need. This may result in the perception in the GAO survey that evidence is not available."
"162" "The office-level findings comparing need for evidence activities and coverage are included in Annex A. These findings show that both evidence need and coverage vary by office, but that on average the need exceeds the coverage."
"163" "OPM is committed to processes and procedures to promote quality of evidence, including adherence to its published evaluation standards, privacy laws, and internal expert guidance. To assess quality of current evidence activities, OPM leveraged data from GAO’s Managing for Results survey to examine evaluation quality dimensions and OPM’s internal survey to assess perceptions of results quality for all evidence types."
"164" "The GAO survey did not explicitly address quality. OPM’s internal survey asked respondents to assess the extent to which they were confident in the quality of the results of their evidence activities, by each activity. While this does not cover all potential aspects of study quality, it does provide an initial assessment of OPM leaders’ views on evidence quality."
"165" ""
"166" "To what extent evidence results are quality Image Details"
"167" "OPM managers’, supervisors’, and senior leaders’ perceptions of evidence quality varied by type of activity and were generally mixed. Respondents were least confident in the quality of statistical activities and most confident in the quality of OPM’s analysis results."
"168" "The office-level findings showing perceived quality for each evidence activity are included in Annex A."
"169" "OPM is currently seeking to strengthen its methodological rigor through centralizing the oversight of research and evaluation within the Office of the Chief Financial Officer’s Planning, Performance, and Evaluation Group, under the purview of the Evaluation Officer. OPM is also instituting more standardized evidence reviews and cataloguing existing evidence on its knowledge management platforms. OPM is also developing a peer review process to further promote appropriateness and rigor of its research and evaluation."
"170" "To assess the current state, OPM leveraged data from GAO’s Managing for Results survey to examine evaluation rigor and OPM’s internal survey to assess perceptions of rigor for all evidence types."
"171" "The GAO survey assessed technical rigor for evaluation activities at OPM as compared to the federal government. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to an item about evaluation rigor."
"172" "OPM performed lower than government overall, in part because there were more who did not respond or indicated that there was no basis to judge. However, this is consistent with OPM’s own internal audit suggesting that there are few evaluation activities happening and most are not rigorous."
"173" "OPM’s internal survey asked respondents to assess the extent to which their office’s evidence activities were technically rigorous and used the appropriate methods, tools, and techniques to address the need."
"174" ""
"175" "To what extent evidence activities are technically rigorous Image Details"
"176" "Overall, OPM managers, supervisors and senior leaders reported a lower extent of technical rigor for evidence activities; with the exception of analysis, fewer than 50 percent of the respondents rated the evidence activities as being rigorous to a very great or great extent."
"177" "The office-level findings showing perceived rigor for each evidence activity are included in Annex A."
"178" "OPM’s evidence activities are generally conducted for internal audiences and program improvement and thus may be less susceptible to external stakeholder influence or bias; however, intra-agency influence and bias may present an issue. To assess perceptions of independence of evidence activities, OPM leveraged data from GAO’s Managing for Results survey to examine undue influence in evaluations and OPM’s internal survey to examine undue influence in all evidence types."
"179" "The GAO survey assessed whether evaluation activities were completed without undue influence at OPM as compared to the federal government. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to an item about undue influence."
"180" " OPM performed lower than government overall, in part because there were more who did not respond or indicated that there was no basis to judge. However, this is consistent with OPM’s own internal audit suggesting that there are few evaluation activities happening and most are not rigorous."
"181" "OPM’s internal survey asked respondents to assess the extent to which their office’s evidence activities were free from bias or undue influence."
"182" ""
"183" "To what extent evidence activities are free from undue influence or bias Image Details"
"184" "Most OPM managers, supervisors and senior leaders reported that evidence activities were independent, which is to say free from undue influence or bias, though there are possibilities to further strengthen the independence of OPM’s evidence activities."
"185" "The office-level findings showing perceived independence for each evidence activity are included in Annex A."
"186" "OCFO’s Planning, Performance, and Evaluation Group manages quarterly data-driven organizational performance review meetings (Results OPM meetings) where agency leadership reviews performance results (via agency dashboards) and assesses progress toward the agency’s strategic goals. OPM plans to use existing agency-wide management processes, such as the Results OPM meetings, to promote the timely communication of results from evidence-building activities to inform decisions, improve policies and services, and support the agency in the achievement of its strategic goals."
"187" "OPM’s Planning, Performance, and Evaluation Group currently incorporates evidence-building activities (such as detailed analyses focused on a particular topic) into the Results OPM meetings and plans to incorporate other types of evidence (such as program evaluation results) to provide agency leadership with additional data on what is working, what is not, and what the agency needs to do to improve to achieve its strategic goals. The team will also leverage these meetings to identify evidence gaps and needs to inform evidence activities and capacity building needs."
"188" "To examine agency perceptions of the effectiveness of its evidence activities in meeting the intended outcomes, OPM will leverage the GAO survey results as a baseline for evidence use."
"189" "The GAO survey assessed extent of use of evaluations to inform programs at OPM as compared to the federal government. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding evaluation use."
"190" "On all items except one, OPM underperformed the government in terms of use of evaluations. However, for both OPM and the government, missing/non-response was around 40 percent, suggesting that many individuals reported not conducting evaluations and thus were exempted from the question. The findings thus suggest room for improvement in both uptake of evaluations and use of their results."
"191" "The GAO survey also assessed extent of use of information beyond performance improvement and evaluation, specifically administrative data, statistical data, and research and analysis. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding use of this information."
"192" "On all items OPM exceeded the government performance in terms of use of administrative data, statistical data, and research and analysis. For OPM and the government, missing/non-response was around 40-45 percent, suggesting that many individuals reported not using other data and thus were exempted from the question. Nonetheless, OPM showed strong performance in using these results to inform program development and strategy, understand program performance, and identify opportunities to improve. OPM shows room for improvement in managing resources based on this information and using it to share or coordinate with others. "
"193" "OPM’s internal survey was employed to examine additional perceptions of the effectiveness of OPM’s evidence activities in informing programs, asking respondents the extent to which evidence activities advance the program/office effectiveness."
"194" ""
"195" "To what extent evidence activities advance program/office effectiveness Image Details"
"196" "OPM managers, supervisors, and senior leaders had mixed responses about the extent to which evidence is used for their program or office, with research and analysis used to the greatest extent to advance effectiveness."
"197" "The office-level findings showing perceived use of each evidence activity are included in Annex A."
"198" "Overall, the findings suggest that there is a continued need to expand adoption of evidence activities and to emphasize the use of evidence results, particularly for statistics and evaluation and in managing resources and collaboration."
"199" "OPM has established partnerships and processes to plan, disseminate, and use priority evidence-building activities (such as research and analysis and/or evaluations that are in the agency’s learning agenda[45]) to inform decisions and improve policies and services."
"200" "OPM has established a research steering committee comprised of senior executives and managers from across the agency, including the Chief Data Officer and the Statistical Official. The steering committee provides strategic guidance and direction on the development of the agency’s learning agenda. The committee identifies the knowledge gaps that inform the learning agenda, proposes draft research questions, and prioritizes and approves initial research questions for the learning agenda and annual evaluation plan[46]. The Committee is co-chaired by the Evaluation Officer and a senior executive or leader appointed by the Director or Chief Management Officer."
"201" "OPM has established a work group comprised of subject matter experts in research, evaluation, and statistics from across the agency, who may advise on (1) learning agenda research question refinement; (2) data, tools, methods, and/or analytic approaches to answer research questions; and (3) other evaluation and evidence-building activities. The group also will meet to exchange results of research and evaluation studies and to engage in capacity building activities. The group is chaired by the Evaluation Officer or their designee."
"202" "OPM has established a Data Governance Board comprised of senior-level staff from programmatic, data, and mission support offices, including the Evaluation Officer and the Statistical Official. The board provides guidance and direction on data strategy, management, and use. The board also develops and maintains the data inventory and manages open access to data. The board is chaired by the Chief Data Officer."
"203" "To assess leadership support for evidence activities and evaluation, OPM will use the GAO survey results as a baseline. The Managing for Results survey asked about commitment of top leadership to using evaluations and additional types of information (administrative and statistical data and research and analysis). Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding leadership support for evidence activities."
"204" "OPM managers reported lower levels of top leadership support for evaluation use and other types of information than government as a whole. However, these results should be considered in the context of changing administrations; top leadership may include politically appointed staff who are no longer at OPM."
"205" "To assess perceptions of access to key evidence resources, OPM will use the GAO survey results regarding access to evidence tools and resources."
"206" "The Managing for Results survey asked about availability of a variety of evidence-related tools and resources. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding evidence tools and resources."
"207" "OPM managers reported a lower extent of access to resources for data than government as a whole. These findings suggest areas for improvement in investment in resources, particularly for collection and analysis of data."
"208" "OPM provides specific evidence trainings, such as use of the data visualization software, which are ongoing. Additionally, OPM intends to launch and employ a researcher and evaluator community of practice, which will include a capacity building component."
"209" "To assess the current perceptions of training provision, OPM will use the GAO survey as a baseline. The Managing for Results survey asked about whether training on a variety of evidence skills were offered to staff."
"210" "Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding evaluation training."
"211" "Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “yes” that a particular type of training was offered to them in the past three years."
"212" "OPM managers reported lower provision of training than government as a whole in all evidence domains. While nearly half reported receiving training around performance management, self-reported receipt of training in all other areas was low, indicating an opportunity to expand access to evidence-related training within OPM."
"213" "OPM intends to focus on improving staff capacity in its FY 2022-2026 strategic plan through provision of training, and hopes to leverage data, research, and evaluation communities to expand training."
"214" "As of FY 2021, OPM offices identified 334 staff that spend at least 25 percent of their time on research and/or analysis, 12 that spend 25 percent or more of their time on statistical work, and 4 that spend 25 percent or more of their time doing evaluation work."
"215" "OPM’s FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification includes funding for a full-time Chief Data Officer as well as two additional central research and evaluation staff in the OCFO Planning, Performance, and Evaluation Group."
"216" "OPM offices identified staff with some key, specific skills (for example, survey analysis, regression analysis, data science, customer experience research, policy analysis, impact evaluation). OPM identified staff skilled in data-related software, including proficiency in SAS, SPSS, R, TOAD, Tableau and PowerBI."
"217" "To better understand evidence staffing and capacity, OPM’s internal survey asked about staffing models for evidence and for those offices with staff, about their capacity to conduct evidence activities."
"218" "OPM managers, supervisors, and senior leaders were asked to describe their staffing model for each evidence activity, including options for internal and external staffing."
"219" ""
"220" "OPM staffing models Image Details"
"221" "For all evidence activities, the most common response was that program offices needed but did not have enough staff to accomplish evidence activities; the greatest perceived needs were for analysis and evaluation staffing."
"222" "For those offices with staffing, respondents were asked to assess the extent of staff capacity for evidence activities."
"223" ""
"224" "To what extent OPM staff have capacity for evidence activities Image Details"
"225" "Assessments of staff capacity varied, but about half of respondents rated their evidence staff’s capacity extent as “moderate.”"
"226" "To assess perceptions of staff data skills, OPM additionally utilized the GAO survey’s results as baseline. The Managing for Results survey includes questions about managers’ appraisals of various staff skills. Below are the results showing the percentage of managers at OPM and government-wide who responded “great extent” or “very great extent” (the top two Likert scale options) in response to items regarding staff capacity."
"227" "OPM underperformed the government in several domains related to staff skills and outperformed in one domain. The results show similar patterns as to those shown in OPM’s internal survey, indicating a need for greater knowledge and skills among staff to conduct all types of evidence activities."
"228" "To gain even more granular information on staff capacity, OPM will implement the Competency Exploration Development and Readiness (CEDAR) tool, which measures employee perceptions of their skill level in key competencies as well as their supervisor’s appraisal of their skills. OPM is developing an evidence- and data science-specific set of competencies, and this tool will be deployed to staff working on evidence generation activities to assess their skills. These findings will be used to identify and target specific staff capacity-building activities."
"229" "All Likert-scaled responses have been converted to numeric scores (1-5, no extent-very great extent) and averaged for ease of comparison between offices. Non-response or not applicable were removed from the calculations."
"230" ""
"231" "Responses by OPM office Image Details"
"232" ""
"233" "Office-level Research Need and Coverage Image Details"
"234" ""
"235" "Office-level Analysis Need and Coverage Image Details"
"236" ""
"237" "Office-level Evaluation Need and Coverage Image Details"
"238" ""
"239" "Office-level Statistic Need and Coverage Image Details"
"240" ""
"241" "Office-level Perceptions of Research Quality Image Details"
"242" ""
"243" "Office-level Perceptions of Analysis Quality Image Details"
"244" ""
"245" "Office-level Perceptions of Evaluation Quality Image Details"
"246" ""
"247" "Office-level Perceptions of Statistics Quality Image Details"
"248" ""
"249" "Office-level Perceptions of Research Rigor Image Details"
"250" ""
"251" "Office-level Perceptions of Analysis Rigor Image Details"
"252" ""
"253" "Office-level Perceptions of Evaluation Rigor Image Details"
"254" ""
"255" "Office-level Perceptions of Statistics Rigor Image Details"
"256" ""
"257" "Office-level Perceptions of Research Independence Image Details"
"258" ""
"259" "Office-level Perceptions of Analysis Independence Image Details"
"260" ""
"261" "Office-level Perceptions of Evaluation Independence Image Details"
"262" ""
"263" "Office-level Perceptions of Statistics Independence Image Details"
"264" ""
"265" "Office-level Perceptions of Research Use Image Details"
"266" ""
"267" "Office-level Perceptions of Analysis Use Image Details"
"268" ""
"269" "Office-level Perceptions of Evaluation Use Image Details"
"270" ""
"271" "Office-level Perceptions of Statistics Use Image Details"
"272" "See 5 U.S.C. § 313, “Evaluation Officers”"
"273" "Pub. L. No. 115-435, 132 Stat. 5529, § 315"
"274" "OMB Circular No. A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget (June 20I9), Part 6."
"275" "The learning agenda identifies the key questions the agency wants to answer to improve operational and programmatic outcomes and develop appropriate policies and regulations to support mission accomplishment. It provides an evidence-building roadmap to support effective and efficient agency functioning."
"276" "In accordance with OMB Circular A-11 Part 6 Section 290, OPM annually prepares a plan describing its evaluation activities for the subsequent year, including the key questions for each planned “significant” evaluation study, as well as they key information collections or acquisitions for research support the agency plans to begin. It is published along with the Annual Performance Plan."
"277" "Policy Analysis: Analysis of data, such as general purpose survey or program-specific data, to generate and inform policy, e.g., estimating regulatory impacts and other relevant effects"
"278" "Program Evaluation: Systematic analysis of a program, policy, organization, or component of these to assess effectiveness and efficiency"
"279" "Foundational Fact Finding: Foundational research and analysis such as aggregate indicators, exploratory studies, descriptive statistics, and basic research"
"280" "Performance Measurement: Ongoing, systematic tracking of information relevant to policies, strategies, programs, projects, goals/objectives, and/or activities"
