"opm.learning.agenda"
"1" "An official website of the United States government"
"2" "Here's how you know"
"3" " Official websites use .gov
A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States."
"4" " Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A lock (  LockA locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites."
"5" "Empowering Excellence in Government through Great People."
"6" "We lead and serve the Federal Government in enterprise human resources management by delivering policies and services to achieve a trusted effective civilian workforce."
"7" "Find out more about Federal compensation throughout your career and around the world."
"8" "Staffing to align with your agency's mission"
"9" "Review the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) Handbook"
"10" "Answering your questions about Healthcare and Insurance"
"11" "Manage your retirement online."
"12" "\"...The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall serve as the Suitability and Credentialing Agent...\" ~Executive Order 13467, as amended"
"13" "OPM’s Human Resources Solutions organization can help your agency answer this critically important question."
"14" "Developing senior leaders in the U.S. Government through Leadership for a Democratic Society, Custom Programs and Interagency Courses."
"15" "Visit this federal site to search for our regulatory notices, proposed and final rules."
"16" "See the latest tweets on our Twitter feed, like our Facebook pages, watch our YouTube videos, and page through our Flickr photos."
"17" "An official website of the United States government"
"18" "Here's how you know"
"19" " The .gov means it's official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site."
"20" " The site is secure.
The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely."
"21" "The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 requires agencies to develop “a systematic plan for identifying and addressing policy questions relevant to the programs, policies, and regulations of the agency.”[29] The learning agenda serves as the required systematic plan, “an evidence-building roadmap to support effective and efficient agency functioning”[30]. The learning agenda is aligned to the agency’s strategic plan and reflects the key priorities of the Administration and the agency."
"22" "To guide development of OPM’s learning agenda, OPM created a Research Steering Committee of executives and managers from across the agency. The Committee identified and prioritized organizational knowledge gaps and potential questions that, if answered, would help OPM deliver better policies and services for its customers."
"23" "OPM also sought stakeholder feedback to inform development of its learning agenda, conducting forums, focus group discussions, and interviews with Federal Government Evaluation Officers, the Chief Human Capital Officers Council, stakeholders at partner agencies, good government groups, university professors and researchers, labor unions, employee associations, and employee resource groups."
"24" "Following the identification of potential questions, the Research Steering Committee categorized the questions and aligned them to the draft FY 2022-2026 OPM strategic plan by removing or modifying those that did not align with the strategic objectives or Administration priorities and proposing new questions. The Research Steering Committee identified 13 broad learning agenda questions that were durable priorities for the period of the strategic plan, as well as associated priority questions and additional questions of interest."
"25" "OPM will seek to answer the associated priority questions identified, assuming resource availability. Associated priority questions will be updated annually so that they reflect the current Administration and agency priorities. The additional questions of interest are included to signal OPM’s research interests to external parties and may be prioritized as resources and capacity permit."
"26" "OPM holds agency-wide data-driven organizational performance review meetings (Results OPM meetings), no less than quarterly, where agency leadership reviews performance results (via agency dashboards) and assesses progress toward the agency’s strategic goals. OPM plans to use existing agency-wide management processes, such as the Results OPM meetings, to promote the timely communication of results from evidence-building activities to inform decisions, improve policies and services, support the agency in the achievement of its strategic goals, and build a culture of continuous learning and improvement. OPM currently incorporates evidence-building activities (such as in-depth analyses) into the Results OPM meetings and plans to incorporate other types of evidence (such as program evaluation results) to provide agency leadership with additional data on what strategies are working or not working in achieving the agency’s strategic goals."
"27" "OPM will also explore channels to disseminate results to key stakeholders as appropriate, including OPM’s website and communications, relevant conferences, academic journals, and media."
"28" "OPM’s learning agenda questions are aligned to its FY 2022-2026 strategic plan. Below find the strategic goals and objectives and the associated learning agenda questions."
"29" "Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"30" "Achieve a federal workforce that is drawn from the diversity of America, exhibited at all levels of government, by supporting agencies in fostering diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible workplaces. By FY 2026, increase a government-wide Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility index score by 6 percentage points."
"31" "Question 1. How can OPM effectively promote Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility (DEIA) through workforce policies and programs?"
"32" "Develop a government-wide vision and strategy and implement policies and initiatives that embrace the future of work and position the federal government as a model employer with respect to hiring, talent development, competitive pay, benefits, and workplace flexibilities."
"33" "Question 2. What strategies and approaches are needed to position the federal government for the post-pandemic work environment and the future of work?"
"34" "Question 3. How do telework, remote work, and hybrid environments affect agencies, employees, and customers? What strategies are effective for optimizing telework, remote work, and hybrid environments?"
"35" "Question 4. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the current federal classification and pay systems? How could classification and pay systems be improved?"
"36" "Question 5. How can OPM design employee benefits and compensation to better meet the needs of federal employees?"
"37" "Question 6. Do government-wide performance management regulations and guidance meet the needs of managers and employees? What strategies are effective in improving performance management?"
"38" "Build the skills of the federal workforce through hiring and training. By FY 2026, increase the government-wide percentage of respondents who agree that their work unit has the job-relevant knowledge and skills necessary to accomplish organizational goals by 4 points."
"39" "Question 7. What challenges or barriers exist in the hiring process? What are effective actions to address these challenges or barriers?"
"40" "Question 8. What strategies are effective in encouraging adoption of rigorous hiring assessments within all pay systems?"
"41" "Question 9. What strategies are effective for increasing and maintaining the capacity of the federal workforce to meet critical agency needs?"
"42" "Champion the federal workforce by engaging and recognizing federal employees and elevating their work. By FY 2026, increase the number of social media engagements on recognition-focused content by 15 percent."
"43" "Transform OPM’s organizational capacity and capability to better serve as the leader in federal human capital management"
"44" "Build the skills of the OPM workforce and attract skilled talent. By FY 2026, increase the percentage of OPM employees who agree that their work unit has the job-relevant knowledge and skills necessary to accomplish organizational goals by 3 percentage points."
"45" "Question 10. What OPM practices effectively promote internal coordination and improved service delivery across its functions?"
"46" "Improve OPM’s relationships and standing as the human capital management thought leader. By FY 2026, increase the percent of CHCOs who strongly agree that OPM treats them as a strategic partner by 23 percentage points."
"47" "Question 10. What OPM practices effectively promote internal coordination and improved service delivery across its functions?"
"48" "Improve OPM’s program efficacy through comprehensive risk management and contract monitoring across the agency. By FY 2026, achieve the OMB-set target for the percentage of spending under category management."
"49" "Question 10. What OPM practices effectively promote internal coordination and improved service delivery across its functions?"
"50" "Establish a sustainable funding and staffing model for OPM that better allows the agency to meet its mission. By FY 2026, increase the percentage of OPM managers who indicate that they have sufficient resources to get their jobs done by 4 percentage points."
"51" "Question 10. What OPM practices effectively promote internal coordination and improved service delivery across its functions?"
"52" "Modernize OPM IT by establishing an enterprise-wide approach, eliminating fragmentation, and aligning IT investments with core mission requirements. By FY 2026, increase the percentage of software projects implementing adequate incremental development to 95 percent."
"53" "Question 10. What OPM practices effectively promote internal coordination and improved service delivery across its functions?"
"54" "Promote a positive organizational culture where leadership drives an enterprise mindset, lives the OPM values, and supports employee engagement and professional growth. By FY 2026, increase OPM’s Leaders Lead Score by 3 points."
"55" "Question 10. What OPM practices effectively promote internal coordination and improved service delivery across its functions?"
"56" "Create a human-centered customer experience by putting the needs of OPM’s customers at the center of OPM’s workforce services, policy, and oversight, increasing OPM’s customer satisfaction index score for targeted services to 4.3 out of 5"
"57" "Enhance the Retirement Services customer experience by providing timely, accurate, and responsive service that addresses the diverse needs of OPM’s customers. By FY 2026, improve the customer satisfaction score to 4.2 out of 5."
"58" "Question 11. To what extent are OPM’s High Impact Service Providers meeting customer needs? What strategies are effective for improving customer service and satisfaction?"
"59" "Create a personalized USAJOBS experience to help applicants find relevant opportunities. By FY 2026, improve applicant satisfaction to 4.1 out of 5 for the desktop platform and to 4.5 out of 5 for the mobile platform."
"60" "Question 11. To what extent are OPM’s High Impact Service Providers meeting customer needs? What strategies are effective for improving customer service and satisfaction?"
"61" "Create a seamless customer and intermediary experience across OPM’s policy, service, and oversight functions. By FY 2026, increase the average score for helpfulness of OPM human capital services in achieving human capital objectives to 4.5 out of 5."
"62" "Transform the OPM website to a user-centric and user-friendly website. By FY 2026, achieve an average effectiveness score of 4 out of 5."
"63" "Provide innovative and data-driven solutions to enable agencies to meet their missions, increasing the percentage of users throughout government who agree that OPM offered innovative solutions while providing services or guidance by 4 points"
"64" "Foster a culture of creativity and innovation within OPM. By FY 2026, increase the percentage of employees who agree that innovation is valued by 4 points."
"65" "Increase focus on government-wide policy work by shifting more low-risk delegations of authorities to agencies."
"66" "Question 12. What strategies are effective in improving oversight efficiency and agency adherence to HR laws and policy guidance?"
"67" "Expand the quality and use of OPM’s federal human capital data. By FY 2026, increase the percentage of CHCO survey respondents who agree that OPM provides agencies with high quality workforce data and information to be used in decision-making by 20 percentage points."
"68" "Improve OPM’s ability to provide strategic human capital management leadership to agencies through expansion of innovation, pilots, and identification of best leading across government. By FY 2026, provide federal agencies with 25 leading practices."
"69" "Question 13. Are OPM’s human capital policies and guidance achieving their intended outcomes?"
"70" "Objective 4.5: Revamp OPM’s policy-making approach to be proactive, timely, systematic, and inclusive. By FY 2026, increase the percent of CHCOs who agree that OPM’s policy approach is responsive to agency needs by 8 percentage points."
"71" "Question 13. Are OPM’s human capital policies and guidance achieving their intended outcomes?"
"72" "Streamline federal human capital regulations and guidance to reduce administrative burden and promote innovation while upholding merit system principles. By FY 2026, improve CHCO agreement that human capital policy changes resulted in less administrative burden to agencies by 8 percentage points."
"73" "How can OPM effectively promote Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility (DEIA) through workforce policies and programs?"
"74" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"75" "As part of the goal of being a model employer, the federal government has an opportunity to set the standard for promoting diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility. Many underserved communities remain under-represented in the federal workforce, especially in positions of leadership. In June 2021, President Biden signed Executive Order 14035 Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility in the federal Workforce. The Order establishes a government-wide initiative, led by OPM and OMB, to advance diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility in all parts of the federal workforce."
"76" "To advance DEIA in government, OPM proposes a set of priority questions for research and evaluation related to agency and workforce DEIA."
"77" "Potential methods."
"78" "Data sources. OPM FEVS; OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration (EHRI) database (demographic and payroll data); agency DEIA assessments"
"79" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (4 years)"
"80" "Potential methods."
"81" "Data sources. OPM FEVS; OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration (EHRI) database (demographic and payroll data); agency DEIA assessments; EEOC complaints"
"82" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (3 years)"
"83" "Potential methods."
"84" "Data sources. OPM FEVS; OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration (EHRI) database (demographic and payroll data); agency DEIA assessments; agency policy and program descriptions; agency productivity measures"
"85" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (3 years)"
"86" "Potential methods."
"87" "Data sources. OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration (EHRI) database (demographic and payroll data); agency policy and program descriptions"
"88" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (2 years)"
"89" "Potential methods."
"90" "Data sources. OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration (EHRI) database (demographic and payroll data); agency policy and program descriptions"
"91" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (2 years)"
"92" "Potential methods."
"93" "Data sources. OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration (EHRI) database (demographic and payroll data); OPM FEVS and other surveys"
"94" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"95" "For all priority questions, access to data with demographic identifiers is a challenge, as many demographic categories are not captured in employee records or surveys. OPM is actively working on proposals for additional data to collect and means of improving voluntary self-identification of these demographics, as per the last priority question."
"96" "For some of the priority questions, relevant agency data such as DEIA activities, productivity measures, and other key factors may not be available or easily accessible. As such, OPM will rely on existing DEIA assessment data or other data that agencies disclose, while acknowledging the limitations and ability to generalize to all agencies."
"97" "What strategies and approaches are needed to position the federal government for the post-pandemic work environment and the future of work?"
"98" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"99" "In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has the opportunity to use lessons learned to determine how work will be performed moving forward and set the standard for how workplace flexibilities can be a strategic asset to help recruit, retain, and support employees in new ways, all while finding new and innovative ways for the government to deliver on its mission and to meet an evolving environment."
"100" "To prepare for the future of work, OPM proposes a set of priority questions for research and evaluation related to the needs of the future workforce and government."
"101" "Potential methods."
"102" "Data sources. Agency documents; in-depth interviews and/or focus group discussions with agency leaders and chief human capital officers (CHCOs); OPM FEVS; pulse surveys"
"103" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"104" "Potential methods."
"105" "Data sources. Literature; in-depth interviews and/or focus group discussions with agency leaders and chief human capital officers (CHCOs); strategic foresight exercises; OPM FEVS; pulse surveys"
"106" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"107" "Potential methods."
"108" "Data sources. Literature; in-depth interviews and/or focus group discussions with agency leaders and chief human capital officers (CHCOs); strategic foresight exercises; USAJOBS and other hiring data"
"109" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (1 year)"
"110" "One key challenge for all future of work studies is that the definition of future of work is broad, and the environment is rapidly changing, making it difficult to scope studies that will have meaningful implications for policies and programs. OPM will look to experts within and outside of government to help identify the most essential questions and data sources."
"111" "What technology (including Artificial Intelligence and machine learning) innovations are effective for human capital processes? What strategies effectively promote non-traditional career paths (for example, phased retirement, flexibility in and out of government)?"
"112" "How do telework, remote work, and hybrid environments affect agencies, employees, and customers? What strategies are effective for optimizing telework, remote work, and hybrid environments?"
"113" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"114" "Telework has become an important strategic management tool for the federal government, increasing employee morale, promoting work-life balance, generating costs savings to federal agencies, and facilitating continuity of agency operations[31] [32]. The 2020 OPM FEVS survey found that 59 percent of federal employees teleworked every day during the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to 3 percent who teleworked every day prior to the pandemic."
"115" "In the post-pandemic return to work, federal agencies are expected to expand use of regular telework and remote work for employees. Many agencies and teams will be operating in hybrid environments, with employees operating with a mix of on-site, telework, and remote workers."
"116" "The expansion of telework, remote work, and hybrid environments poses many research and evaluation questions for government about how to best understand and optimize these modalities."
"117" "Potential methods."
"118" "Data sources. USAJOBS applicant data; USAJOBS position data; hiring manager surveys; EHRI (demographic and payroll data)"
"119" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (2 years)"
"120" "Potential methods."
"121" "Data sources. OPM FEVS; pulse surveys; EHRI (demographic and payroll data)"
"122" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (2 years)"
"123" "Potential methods."
"124" "Data sources. OPM FEVS; pulse surveys; EHRI (demographic and payroll data); agency productivity data"
"125" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (2 years)"
"126" "For all telework studies, a key challenge is the quality of the current payroll data, which OPM is seeking to address. As noted for Learning Agenda Question 1, the lack of availability of certain types of demographic data reduces OPM’s ability to compare and draw conclusions; OPM is likewise working on promoting collection of additional demographic data. Finally, a challenge is that telework experiments are contingent upon agency interest and participation; OPM is exploring partnerships to conduct these experiments."
"127" "What are the strengths and weaknesses of the current federal classification and pay systems? How could classification and pay systems be improved?"
"128" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"129" "The federal classification system is the federal government’s system for defining and organizing federal positions performing white collar work, primarily to assign rates of pay. Most white-collar employees (80 percent) work under the General Services (GS) pay plan, fitting into over 420 occupational series[33]."
"130" "The federal classification system was developed in 1949 and OPM has had multiple inquiries to determine if the system can manage the modern updates to the federal government. OPM has made additions or modifications to the system over time by request of agencies to fit their needs. OPM also provides leadership on pay systems for civilian federal employees by developing and maintaining governmentwide regulations and policies on authorities such as General Schedule locality pay, the Federal Wage System, special rates, and pay for employees in non-foreign areas."
"131" "These research questions ask whether or not the current systems are working to meet agency needs and if there are alternatives to meet the needs of the federal workforce. "
"132" "Potential methods."
"133" "Data sources. Literature; in-depth interviews or focus groups with other agencies; classification systems administrative and structural data"
"134" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2024 (1 year)"
"135" "The main challenge is the complexity of the federal classification system, making assessing its functioning and alternatives challenging. OPM will leverage expertise within government to refine and scope questions related to the classification system."
"136" "How can OPM design employee benefits and compensation to better meet the needs of federal employees?"
"137" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"138" "OPM administers key benefits for federal employees, including health insurance and retirement services. In recent years, organizations like the Government Accountability Office have highlighted a perceived disconnect between the current systems that provide federal pay and benefits and efforts to optimize workforce performance and attract and retain qualified applicants and employees[34]. According to the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, federal agencies could become more attractive employers if the federal government improved the flexibility of compensation packages to be more in-line with those provided in the private sector.[35]"
"139" "Additionally, in January 2021, President Biden signed Executive Order 13985 On Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities through the federal government. This Executive Order required agencies to identify programs that may have existing equity gaps in their service delivery. OPM identified two potential areas of improvement related to benefits: Federal Employee Health Benefit (FEHB) plan selection and retirement readiness."
"140" "To promote better design of federal benefits, OPM proposes a set of priority questions for research and evaluation related to benefit delivery and equity."
"141" "Potential methods."
"142" "Data sources. Literature; FEBS; in-depth interviews and focus group discussions with federal employees and agency benefits officers"
"143" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"144" "Potential methods."
"145" "Data sources. OPM plan selection website analytics; plan selection users survey data; health plan participation data; FEBS"
"146" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (3 years)"
"147" "Potential methods."
"148" "Data sources. Agency training or educational session records; in-depth interviews or focus groups with agency benefits officers; surveys with educational session participants; TSP enrollment and election data; literature"
"149" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (3 years)"
"150" "Partner. Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board"
"151" "A challenge for questions related to health plan benefits is that OPM does not have full health claims data for federal enrollees. OPM is continuing to expand the FEHB-related data that it collects."
"152" "OPM has a mandate to provide financial literacy information, but is not responsible for administering the TSP, so does not have direct access to TSP data. OPM will collaborate with the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board on any TSP-related programs, data sharing, and evaluations."
"153" "Do government-wide performance management regulations and guidance meet the needs of managers and employees? What strategies are effective in improving performance management?"
"154" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"155" "The current Code of Federal Regulations governing federal agency performance management was introduced in 1995 and transformed the rigid approach to performance management into a more flexible process, giving agencies greater ability to customize the performance management process to meet their business needs. However, it is not clear how well the model applies today and effectively supports the future of work."
"156" "The following research and evaluation questions explore the current models for performance management and what strategies might improve agency performance management."
"157" "Potential methods."
"158" "Data sources. Literature; surveys with supervisors and employees"
"159" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (2 years)"
"160" "The main challenge related to questions on the performance management system is agencies use differing performance management systems, thus it may be difficult to identify global solutions. Relatedly, not all performance management data is available or digitized, limiting the ability to draw conclusions about actual performance management practices and ratings. OPM will respond to these constraints by triangulating data where possible and acknowledging the limitations of its approaches."
"161" "What challenges or barriers exist in the hiring process? What are the effective actions to address these challenges or barriers?"
"162" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"163" "In a rapidly modernizing world, OPM has an opportunity to rebuild and empower the federal workforce for success. Since 2001, GAO has included strategic human capital management on its High-Risk List for the federal government. According to GAO, mission-critical skill gaps in the federal government pose a high risk to the nation because they impede the government from cost effectively serving the public and achieving results[36]."
"164" "President Biden’s Executive Order 13985 On Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities through the federal government required agencies to identify programs that may have existing equity gaps in their service delivery. OPM identified a potential area of improvement in hiring: use of applicant flow data."
"165" "To increase the evidence base about recruitment and hiring, OPM proposes the following research and evaluation questions related to the federal hiring process and how it could be improved."
"166" "Potential methods."
"167" "Data sources. USAJOBS applicant data; USAJOBS position data; in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, and/or surveys with job applicants"
"168" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (1 year)"
"169" "Potential methods."
"170" "Data sources. Literature; government reports; administrative data for internship programs; EHRI (demographic and payroll data)"
"171" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2024 (2 years)"
"172" "Potential methods."
"173" "Data sources. USAJOBS applicant flow data; surveys with agency HR personnel; EHRI (demographic and payroll data)"
"174" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (2 years)"
"175" "Potential methods."
"176" "Data sources. Agency reports; USAJOBS data; EHRI (demographic data)"
"177" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (2 years)"
"178" "Potential methods."
"179" "Data sources. Needs assessment questionnaire; agency meetings"
"180" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"181" "USAJOBS does not cover all federal agencies, nor does it capture data regarding direct hires, limiting the completeness and generalizability of the data. OPM will address this challenge by collecting additional data as needed and acknowledging the existing limitations in the design and interpretation of research."
"182" "What strategies are effective in encouraging adoption of rigorous hiring assessments within all pay systems?"
"183" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"184" "Hiring assessments are an effective means for narrowing down large applicant pools and eliminating applicants who are not qualified for a position. Not all assessments are equally valid. Meta-analytic research suggests that certain types of hiring assessments are better at predicting performance on the job than others. For example, a structured interview is more predictive than an unstructured interview. Assessments such as cognitive ability tests, situational judgment tests, work samples, and biodata instruments are more predictive of job performance than self-report training and experience questionnaires[37]."
"185" "In July 2020, Executive Order 13932 Modernizing and Reforming the Assessment and Hiring of Federal Job Candidates called on OPM to work with agencies to move toward more rigorous candidate assessments, rather than solely relying on candidates’ educational attainment or self-evaluations of stated abilities. The Executive Order also specified that agencies should continually evaluate the effectiveness of their assessment strategies."
"186" "To contribute to that continuous evaluation of hiring assessments, OPM proposes the following research and evaluation questions."
"187" "Potential methods."
"188" "Data sources. USAHIRE data; hiring manager surveys"
"189" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (1 year)"
"190" "USAHIRE does not cover all federal agencies, limiting the completeness and generalizability of the data; OPM will provide its findings with this caveat. Assessments also vary in terms of rigor and deployment, which will be a key factor in interpreting and presenting the findings of any broader analyses."
"191" "What strategies are effective for increasing and maintaining the capacity of the Federal workforce to meet critical agency needs?"
"192" "Goal 1: Position the federal government as a model employer, improving the government-wide satisfaction index score by 4 points"
"193" "One of OPM’s key functions is to provide guidance and assistance with building and maintaining the skills of the federal workforce. With the expansion of new technology and automation within government, federal employees will need new skills to meet evolving workforce needs[38]. OPM is enabling agencies to reskill and upskill segments of the workforce through data analytics and interactive tools. OPM’s Reskilling Toolkit contains information, guidance, tips, and resources on how to reskill and/or upskill employees impacted by major workforce changes."
"194" "OPM also helps federal employees advance their careers and prepare to lead through oversight of interagency rotation programs and its leadership training institute. It further assists other federal agencies with preparing for evolving workforce needs, monitoring SES retention, and succession planning."
"195" "To better understand the need for building and maintaining workforce skills, OPM proposes the following research and evaluation questions."
"196" "Potential methods."
"197" "Data sources. Classification data; agency training records; surveys"
"198" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (1 year)"
"199" "As upskilling efforts are not yet widespread, data may not be available to understand which occupational series are best suited for these efforts. OPM will thus focus on specific job series and agencies."
"200" "How can OPM improve internal coordination and service delivery across its functions?"
"201" "Goal 2: Transform OPM’s organizational capacity and capability to better serve as the leader in federal human capital management"
"202" "OPM has identified major organizational capacity and capability challenges that it must address in order to meet its mission and better serve customers. The strategic planning process identified OPM’s strengths in subject matter expertise and commitment to mission, but continued issues related to staff capacity, legacy IT, siloed departments, and relationships and standing with external entities. The focus of strategic plan goal two is strengthening OPM’s internal capacity and processes to deliver its policies, programs, and services."
"203" "OPM has thus identified questions related to its internal functioning that it would like to answer to become a more efficient and effective organization."
"204" "Potential methods."
"205" "Data sources. Literature; agency documents; pulse surveys; pre- and post-training surveys"
"206" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"207" "Conducting evaluations and pulse surveys is dependent on leadership support for such initiatives. OPM will continue to work with leaders to align this learning agenda question with agency priorities and initiatives linked to the strategic plan."
"208" "To what extent are OPM’s High Impact Service Providers meeting customer needs? What strategies are effective for improving customer service and satisfaction?"
"209" "Goal 3: Create a human-centered customer experience by putting the needs of OPM’s customers at the center of OPM’s workforce services, policy, and oversight, increasing OPM’s customer satisfaction index score for targeted services to 4.3 out of 5"
"210" "OPM provides customer service to the public and federal employees through two high impact service providers: retirement services and USAJOBS."
"211" "OPM processes more than 100,000 new retirement claims each year while also managing any changes to the federal retirement accounts for nearly 2.6 million existing annuitants and survivors. OPM’s Retirement Services answers approximately 1.8 million phone calls each year. OPM’s Retirement Services faces issues in delivering its services, including legacy contact center infrastructure and manual case processing, leading to backlogs and delays in providing services and low customer satisfaction[39]."
"212" "OPM’s USAJOBS – the federal government’s official employment site and source for federal job announcements – serves as the “front door” to the federal hiring process for over 500 federal organizations. In FY 2019, agencies posted more than 300,000 job announcements and more than 17 million applicants used the USAJOBS platform. Applicants have expressed frustration over the lack of transparency in the federal hiring process and confusion over the jobs for which they are eligible and qualified.[40] Hiring managers have expressed challenges finding the best candidates and lack data to make informed decisions.[41]"
"213" "To strengthen OPM’s service delivery and customer experience, OPM proposes to address the following questions."
"214" "Potential methods."
"215" "Data sources. USAJOBS applicant data; USAJOBS feature data; applicant satisfaction surveys; hiring manager satisfaction surveys"
"216" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2023 (3 years)"
"217" "Potential methods."
"218" "Data sources. OPM retirement case audits; case processing data; customer experience surveys"
"219" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2024 (2 years)"
"220" "Potential methods."
"221" "Data sources. OPM services online user data; call center data; customer experience surveys"
"222" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (2 years)"
"223" "USAJOBS does not cover all federal agencies, and not all applicants may choose to use existing features, limiting the completeness and generalizability of the data. For both HISPs, customer experience survey response rates are low, and respondent demographics are not currently available. OPM will seek ways to strengthen its customer service surveys to include additional service categories and demographics and will interpret its findings with caution."
"224" "What strategies are effective in improving oversight efficiency and agency adherence to HR laws and policy guidance?"
"225" "Goal 4: Provide innovative and data-driven solutions to enable agencies to meet their missions, increasing the percentage of users throughout government who agree that OPM offered innovative solutions while providing services or guidance by 4 points"
"226" "Objective 4.2: Increase focus on government-wide policy work by shifting more low-risk delegations of authorities to agencies."
"227" "OPM’s policy and oversight roles include conducting hundreds of transactional approval and adjudicative activities such as approving individual dual compensation waiver requests, approving individual requests for voluntary retirement early authority or voluntary separation incentive payments, approving veterans pass over requests, and reviewing individual job grading appeals. Although these requests for approval and adjudication are important to ensure adherence to law, agencies have expressed a need for greater decision-making authority. OPM intends to delegate, to the maximum extent possible, decision-making authorities to agencies, and conduct cyclical reviews to verify that appropriate actions were taken."
"228" "OPM includes questions related to OPM’s policy and oversight functions, to prepare for increased delegation and to understand the effect of delegations on OPM, agencies, and the workforce."
"229" "Potential methods."
"230" "Data sources. Agency audit findings; in-depth interviews and/or focus group discussions with CHCOs and other stakeholders"
"231" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"232" "Potential methods."
"233" "Data sources. Agency audit findings; DE certification training records"
"234" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (1 year)"
"235" "Not all agencies receive oversight, or participate in delegated examining, limiting the generalizability of the data to other agencies. OPM will thus qualify its findings as relevant to the agencies for which data is available."
"236" "Are OPM’s human capital policies and guidance achieving their intended outcomes?"
"237" "Goal 4: Provide innovative and data-driven solutions to enable agencies to meet their missions, increasing the percentage of users throughout government who agree that OPM offered innovative solutions while providing services or guidance by 4 points"
"238" "OPM interprets and enforces governing law and provides policy direction and leadership in designing, developing, and promulgating government-wide human capital systems, programs, and policies that support the current and emerging needs of federal agencies. In addition, the agency provides technical support and guidance to agencies on the full range of human capital management policies and practices. OPM plans to shift how it develops policy, from a more reactive to a more proactive, timely, systematic, and inclusive approach."
"239" "OPM is seeking to better understand both the process of policy and guidance development and the effects of its policy and guidance on the federal workforce. OPM has conducted few evaluations of whether its policies and guidance are achieving their intended outcomes."
"240" "OPM is thus proposing a broad question related to process and outcome evaluations of policies and guidance and will identify policies and guidance to evaluate in accordance with evolving priorities."
"241" "Potential methods."
"242" "Data sources. EHRI (demographic and payroll data); FEBS; in-depth interviews and/or focus groups with federal employees"
"243" "Estimated start and duration. FY 2022 (2 years)"
"244" "Partner. Department of Labor"
"245" "FEPLA is a new policy and robust data may not be available in the short-term. As such, OPM will focus on answering initial questions and will lay the groundwork for future, longer-term studies. Payroll data is not complete and has historically had data quality issues; OPM is working to proactively improve payroll data, with a focus on improving leave-related data."
"246" "Section 101 of the Evidence Act. 5 U.S.C. §312(a)."
"247" "OMB Memo M19-23"
"248" "Lister, K. (2020). Lessons Learned from Remote Working During COVID-19. Testimony before the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, S.Hrg. 116-264"
"249" "United States Office of Personnel Management. (2020). Status of telework in the federal government: Report to Congress fiscal year 2019."
"250" "Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, TS-134, Revised August 2009"
"251" "Government Accountability Office. (2019). Federal Workforce: Talent Management Strategies to Help Agencies Better Compete in a tight Labor Market. Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Government Operations, Committee on Oversight and Reform, House of Representatives. (GAO-19-723T). Washington, DC."
"252" "National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service (2020). Inspired to Serve: The Final Report of the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service. March 2020. Washington, DC."
"253" "Government Accountability Office (2021). HIGH-RISK SERIES: Dedicated Leadership Needed to Address Limited Progress in Most High-Risk Areas (GAO-21-119SP). March 2021."
"254" "Morris, S. B., Daisley, R. L., Wheeler, M., & Boyer, P. (2015). A meta-analysis of the relationship between individual assessments and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(1), 5–20."
"255" "Partnership for Public Service. (2019). Looking Inward for Talent: Retraining Employees for Tomorrow’s Jobs."
"256" "Government Accountability Office. (2018). Federal Retirement: OPM Actions Needed to Improve Application Processing Times (GAO-19-217). Washington, DC."
"257" "Government Accountability Office. (2020). USAJOBS WEBSITE: OPM Has Taken Actions to Assess and Enhance the User Experience (GAO-21-31)."
"258" "Partnership for Public Service. (2020). A Time for Talent: Improving Federal Recruiting and Hiring."
