U.S. Small Business Administration
*
Enterprise
1953
Learning Agenda
Fiscal Years 2022-2026
Come In
WE'RE
OPEN
Helping All Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs Achieve Their Dreams
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
1
CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITIES: Equity and Customer-Centric Design and Delivery
4
STRATEGIC GOAL 1: Ensure Equitable and Customer-Centric Design and
Delivery of Programs to Support Small Businesses and Innovative Startups
5
Objective 1.1: Ensure all entrepreneurs have access to capital to start and grow their business
.5
Objective 1.2: Build a thriving national innovation ecosystem that promotes investments
in all small business communities
6
Objective 1.3: Grow exporting opportunities to help small businesses across the country
expand into new markets
7
Objective 1.4: Build back an inclusive and proficient small business contracting base
ready to compete for all federal procurement opportunities
.8
Objective 1.5: Build an equitable entrepreneurial ecosystem through tailored training and counseling. 10
STRATEGIC GOAL 2: Build Resilient Businesses and a Sustainable Economy
12
Objective 2.1: Help small businesses recover from the pandemic and become more resilient
12
Objective 2.2: Help prepare small businesses and rebuild communities affected by natural disasters
14
STRATEGIC GOAL 3: Implement Strong Stewardship of Resources for Greater Impact
16
Objective 3.1: Strategically manage resources by integrating quality data, evidence, and
risk in decision-making processes
16
Objective 3.2: Build an inclusive and high-performing workforce
17
Objective 3.3: Develop and deploy technology-driven solutions to enhance mission delivery
18
APPENDIX A: Endnotes
19
I
This page intentionally left blank.
II
INTRODUCTION
Introduction
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) promotes
Strategic Goal 2: Build Resilient Businesses and a
the use of evidence to inform the development of its
Sustainable Economy
policy, strategy, and resource decisions and improve its
Strategic Goal 3: Implement Strong Stewardship of
programs and operations.¹ The Agency has developed
Resources for Greater Impact
this Enterprise Learning Agenda (ELA) to empower
program managers to achieve their goals while
The SBA has identified ELA questions that align with
fostering an environment of continuous learning. The
Administration priorities and core values: equity,
ELA supports the Agency's implementation of the
customer-centric design and delivery, and technology
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
modernization. Questions related to these three areas
2018² (Evidence Act) by identifying and prioritizing areas
are within the relevant objective sections. Additionally,
for evidence to improve program or policy effectiveness,
the ELA has a separate section on equity and customer-
by assessing progress toward desired outcomes; by
centric design and delivery that captures cross-cutting
testing pilot initiatives or program adjustments, and by
questions spanning multiple objectives.
building evidence on resource management functions.
The Evidence Act requires that ELA questions be
The SBA will update the ELA with new evidence and
considerate of a broad range of Agency priorities,
identify the policy, research, evaluation, and regulatory
including regulations and other policies, defines
questions it plans to answer in annual ELA updates and
questions as either long-term (designated LT) or short-
the SBA's annual evaluation plan. Evidence-building
term (designated ST); and identifies questions best
activities will help SBA program managers answer the
suited for external engagement. Long-term questions
questions presented and continue to build a suite of
support the SBA's understanding of intermediate
evidence to inform decision-making. Results will be
outcomes, long-term outcomes, or program impact;
published on the SBA website,³ and findings will be
answer questions that require multi-stage or multi-
incorporated into the SBA's performance management
program evidence building; or are substantially
framework to inform long-term strategy.
impacted by external factors. Short-term questions may
be answered using rapid iterative testing, existing data,
Enterprise Learning Agenda
or literature reviews. Additionally, the SBA has identified
questions that inform its understanding of program
Framework
performance, such as questions that support program
The SBA's ELA is organized according to the strategic
managers' understanding of customer satisfaction and
goals and objectives in SBA's FY 2022-2026 Strategic
may be likely to be answered in the short-term but
Plan and identifies priority questions for each objective
require long-term monitoring.
to build evidence and foster continuous learning. Each
strategic objective is presented with an overview,
Stakeholder Engagement
a review of prior research and results of the SBA's
evidence building activities, priority questions, and
The SBA engaged key stakeholders in the development
current and planned evidence-building activities in
of the ELA. Collaboration with stakeholders helped
alignment with OMB guidance.4 The FY 2022-2026
the Agency expand and better define questions, which
strategic goals are:
also promoted transparency. Some questions may
Strategic Goal 1: Ensure Equitable and Customer-
benefit from engagement with external researchers
Centric Design and Delivery of Programs to Support
or stakeholders where some data necessary to
Small Businesses and Innovative Startups
answer a question may reside outside the Agency,
where SBA data may be made available to external
researchers interested in these questions, when external
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
Small Business Administration
1
INTRODUCTION
stakeholders share questions and priorities with the
small business and evidence-focused non-profit
SBA, or when the answer to the question has broad
organizations, and other federal agencies; and the
implications outside the Agency. However, the SBA
general public through a Federal Register Notice. The
welcomes input and collaboration from stakeholders on
SBA considers these conversations to be ongoing and
all questions.
continually consults stakeholders.
The SBA gathered employee input through meetings
Significant evaluations, identified in the Agency's
and correspondence and will continue to solicit input
annual evaluation plan, will be disseminated publicly
through its Evidence and Evaluation Community
upon their completion. The SBA frequently presents
of Practice. The Agency holds quarterly deep dive
on the results to interested stakeholders. For example,
performance reviews and an annual strategic objective
the SBA has presented findings to its Evidence and
review with senior leadership to discuss performance. At
Evaluation Community of Practice, interagency
these sessions, key questions emerge and are integrated
committees, councils, trade associations, and grantees.
into the ELA, where appropriate. The SBA's program
evaluators conduct learning agenda sessions with
leadership and issue annual evidence and evaluation
Challenges and Proposed
guidance to solicit proposals for new evidence-building
Solutions
projects. During internal reviews, the SBA seeks
Although the SBA has begun to expand capacity for
feedback through the SBA's internal newsletter.
evidence-based decision-making, some challenges
remain. First, the SBA, along with most federal agencies,
When the SBA conducts a program evaluation, program
struggles to identify or collect quality data to conduct
managers serve as key partners. The evaluation team
engages them to better understand and formulate
rigorous analysis. Collecting data of adequate quality
for analysis can be expensive and burdensome on the
their evaluation questions, determine available data,
respondent and the Agency. To address this challenge,
understand program needs, and help interpret findings.
the Agency has taken steps to improve the quality of
The team involves program managers throughout the
course of the evaluation and discusses how the results
its routinely collected administrative data and make
it adequate and available for research and statistical
may be used during strategic discussions.
purposes, including establishing a Data Governance
Board chaired by the Chief Data Officer and identifying
The SBA's ELA will be reviewed annually and updated
priority datasets for publication. The SBA has also made
as needed to reflect current priorities and ongoing
progress in creating data documentation, updating
evidence building. For past iterations, upon which this
System of Records Notices to include approved uses,
ELA builds, the SBA sought feedback through channels
and collecting quality data. The SBA has created a Data
such as Federal Register Notices, the FedEval Listserv,
Management Community of Practice, is developing
and outreach and letters to research organizations,
a Data Strategy, and will continue to implement the
professional associations, state and local economic
Federal Data Strategy. Barriers to access or restrictions
development organizations, trade groups, and
on use of data for evaluation pose challenges. The SBA
think tanks. The present update was created by first
uses administrative data from statistical agencies (e.g.,
synthesizing prior evidence questions with submissions
Bureau of the Census, Bureau of Labor Statistics) and
from SBA program offices. The SBA then drafted the
collects further data, such as qualitative data, while
ELA and gathered feedback from senior leadership
conducting program evaluations to overcome some of
and program managers; SBA employees through the
these challenges.
Evidence and Evaluation Community of Practice,
an SBA-wide "Peer-to-Peer" learning session, and
Even when rigorous evidence or appropriate data are
announcements in the SBA Daily newsletter; external
available, SBA staff must have the capacity to identify
stakeholders through letters to academic researchers,
2
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
INTRODUCTION
and use them for decision-making. The SBA recognizes
To conduct low-cost evidence building, the SBA
the importance of building staff capacity and has
frequently uses administrative data from its programs
established mechanisms to support this activity. The
and from other state and federal sources. The SBA
SBA manages an Evidence and Evaluation Community
uses many administrative datasets and frequently
of Practice that brings together evaluation, analysis, and
reviews them to improve their quality and relevance
data practitioners across the Agency to discuss issues
for evidence building. The SBA's publicly available data
and provide training. The SBA also identifies evidence
can be found at www.sba.gov/data. Additionally, the
and discusses how it may apply to decision-making
SBA frequently uses federal contracting data found
through various senior leadership forums, including
at SAM.gov for evidence building for its government
quarterly deep dive performance reviews. The SBA
contracting programs and uses publicly available data
has also developed an Evidence Capacity Assessment,
from the U.S. Bureau of the Census to understand the
which will guide capacity building.
general small business landscape.
The SBA is also making more administrative data
Methods and Data Sources
available to researchers through the Census Bureau's
The SBA strives to conduct more evidence-building
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers. This
activities to understand and advance its mission. These
partnership between the SBA and Census allows
activities include formative and summative program
researchers to use SBA data to build rigorous evidence
evaluations, program performance measurement,
while maintaining security and privacy protections.
data analysis and dashboarding, regulatory analyses,
In FYs 2020 and 2021, the SBA transferred 7(a), 504,
and research. The methodology for each activity is
Disaster loan, 8(a), and Small Business Contracting
tailored to the question(s) of interest and may involve
data to Census under this agreement, and the agencies
one or more of the following: experimental and quasi-
are actively collaborating to share more administrative
experimental designs, descriptive and inferential
data. To supplement administrative data use and data-
statistics, mathematical or econometric modeling, data
sharing agreements, the SBA conducts its own primary
visualization, literature reviews or foundational fact
and secondary data collection as needed for evidence-
finding, performance measurement, regulatory analysis,
building efforts, most often in the form of surveys,
and qualitative research.
interviews, focus groups, and literature reviews.
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda |
Small Business Administration
3
CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITIES
Cross-Cutting Priorities: Equity and
Customer-Centric Design and Delivery
The SBA has identified overarching ELA questions
Through the Federal Government.5 The assessment
related to priorities that cut across objectives: equity
will serve as a foundation for identifying gaps that
and customer-centric design and delivery. They are
exist in supporting businesses that are underserved.
discussed in detail by objective, but several questions
New performance measures are being added across
broadly apply:
programs to measure equity, and future program
evaluations will include questions on equity. Literature
reviews can provide baseline knowledge regarding the
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
needs of entrepreneurs that are underserved, whereas
1. What is the demographic and geographic makeup
qualitative analysis can clarify barriers to accessing
of the SBA's program participants, how does this
the SBA's programs and methods to address these
compare with the eligible population, and which
barriers. Literature review as well as collaboration with
underserved small businesses can the SBA better
other agencies can provide insight on collecting better
serve through its programs? (ST)
data to increase knowledge around program equity.
2. Are there barriers that prevent underserved small
In FY 2021, the SBA partnered with the GSA's Office of
businesses from accessing SBA programs, and if so,
Evaluation Sciences to study strategies that promote
how can the SBA address these barriers to increase
equitable distribution of COVID-19 relief funds. Findings
equitable distribution of services? (LT)
suggest several promising strategies including reducing
3. How can the SBA increase awareness of, ease of
documentation burden;6 examining the methods
access to, and improved outcomes for its programs
by which applicants are chosen for funding; and
across the entire demographic makeup of its
implementing practices that U.S. cities reported to be
customer base? (ST)
successful, such as having representative staff provide
technical assistance, utilizing data, and conducting
4. How do SBA customers feel about their experience
community outreach.
with SBA programs and services, and how can the
SBA improve this experience, especially for small
Customer experience, satisfaction, and service metrics
businesses that are underserved? (LT)
are continuously collected for SBA programs, with
5. What best practices in customer-centric design and
more being added in the current strategic plan cycle.
delivery of government programs could the SBA
Interviews, surveys, and focus groups could also
integrate into its program delivery? (ST)
help the SBA understand how it can better serve its
customers. Literature review and collaboration with
External and Government-Wide Research
other agencies can be used to identify best practices in
customer-centric program design and delivery.
1. How can the SBA best increase response rates and
data quality for the demographic data it collects to
develop optimal policies and strategies to support
underserved small businesses? (ST)
In addition to cross-cutting questions, the SBA has
identified ELA questions related to each of its strategic
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. The
objectives. These questions represent priority questions
SBA is conducting an internal equity assessment in
for evidence-building that, when answered, will
response to Executive Order 13985, Advancing Racial
help SBA meet each objective more effectively and
Equity and Support for Underserved Communities
efficiently.
4
Small Business Administration
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
Strategic Goal 1: Ensure Equitable and Customer-
Centric Design and Delivery of Programs to Support
Small Businesses and Innovative Startups
Objective 1.1: Ensure all
The percentages of minority-owned, women-owned,
and start-up businesses that have obtained loans
entrepreneurs have access to
in the 7(a) and 504 programs are greater than their
capital to start and grow their
percentages in conventional small business loans.17
business
The SBA's Surety Bond Guarantee program also reaches
firms that would otherwise not have access to bonding
SBA capital programs promote low-cost access to
and does so with lower costs.18 In terms of equity of
capital, job creation, and sales increases for small
outcomes, each $1 million in 7(a) and 504 loans raises
businesses. Federally guaranteed loans offer borrowers
employment by three to four jobs, on average, during
longer terms than conventional loans, allowing them
the first three post-loan years with greater effects for
to meet debt-service coverage ratio requirements.9
younger firms and where credit conditions are weak.19
SBA 7(a) and 504 loans have been found to increase
The SBA has potential to support more underserved
loan recipient employment by 3 to 3.5 jobs on average
businesses in the future due to the addition of new
during the first three post-loan years, 10 and
firms
lenders through the Paycheck Protection Program
involved in these programs observed sales increases
(PPP), which had more than 5,400 participating
as well. 11 Similarly, 7(a) loans had a small yet positive
lenders.20
impact on output and employment growth in 153
micropolitan areas in the Southeastern United States
in the period 1990-2015 and promoted diversification
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
of the industrial base. 12 A weak but positive statistical
1. How can the SBA broaden its lender base and keep
relationship exists between growth in SBA lending
lenders that have only participated in the PPP
per capita and a state's civilian employment rates,
engaged with diverse small businesses? (ST)
independent of a state's income level. 13 Additionally,
2. What impact does lending have on job creation,
SBA Microloan recipients reported increases in revenue
revenue growth, export sales, and additional
and number of employees from the year of loan
capital growth, how do these impacts vary by
initiation to 2019.14
business owner demographics, and what factors are
responsible for these observed impacts? (LT)
Racial and gender disparities currently exist in the
use of and access to credit for small businesses and
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. The SBA
entrepreneurs.15 Differences in credit risk cause some
collects administrative data on PPP lenders (type of
of the differences in minority access to credit. Use of
lender, new or existing) and limited demographic
services provided by community development financial
data on PPP borrowers. These data can be used to
institutions and credit unions, which specialize in local
help identify new lenders best poised to serve diverse
communities, remains low among minority-owned
businesses.
firms.16
In FY 2023, the SBA will conduct a mixed-method
Partially addressing these racial and gender gaps, a
formative evaluation to study the attractors and
body of evidence demonstrates that the SBA makes
barriers to regulated CDFI and MDI entity participation
capital available to small businesses that do not
in the SBA's ongoing capital programs. The evaluation
traditionally access the private sector for capital needs.
will also address how the SBA can grow the use of
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda |
Small Business Administration
5
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
its capital programs among regulated CDFI and MDI
Objective 1.2: Build a thriving
lenders that target underserved small business markets
to further equitable distribution of capital. The study
national innovation ecosystem
will use publicly available information on regulated
that promotes investments in all
CDFI and MDI entities and SBA administrative records
small business communities
for CDFI and MDI participation in SBA capital programs.
The SBA will collect qualitative data from regulated
The SBA's investment and innovation programs are
CDFI and MDI entities to assess program attractors,
beneficial to small business growth and represent
participation barriers, lender needs, and potential
low-cost catalysts for job creation. Several government
areas of improvement. Challenges include potential
agencies with SBIR/STTR programs demonstrate returns
data gaps in the SBA, CDFI, and MDI data and difficulty
on investment. For example, SBIR/STTR programs
recruiting lenders for participation in the qualitative
run by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the
components of the study. Therefore, purposeful
Department of the Navy created billions of dollars in
sampling and extensive outreach may be needed to
new investments and sales for small businesses, 21,22
and
collect sufficient data.
the Department of Defense estimates a 22:1 return on its
SBIR/STTR investments. 23 SBIC-funded small businesses
The SBA's collaboration with Census will continue to
support job creation in the U.S. economy, with job-
help the Agency understand the impacts of 504 and
creation results comparable to those of the private
7(a) loans through quasi-experimental investigation
equity industry.24
of business outcomes for firms that have received
these loans. Additionally, the SBA collects voluntarily
The SBA's investment and innovation programs have
self-reported demographic data for its 7(a) and 504
promoted diversification of industry sector, geographic
borrowers and, having reasonable coverage¹ for these
distribution, and demographic representation. As
data, can compare outcomes by demographic group.
of 2020, 70 percent of private equity investments to
Qualitative analyses, as well as quantitative analyses
small businesses were made in five metropolitan areas
like longitudinal regression analyses can elucidate
in California, Massachusetts, and New York. 25 SBICs
program outcomes, and surveys can be used to assess
promote a more equitable allocation of venture capital
satisfaction with services.
with a distribution of investments from debenture SBICs
that is more geographically dispersed than investments
from private venture capital funds.26 The SBIC program
promotes greater diversification by industry sector and
geographic distribution when compared with private
venture capital, achieving the goal of providing capital
to underserved entrepreneurs.²
With respect to gender and socio-economic status,
greater gender balance exists among investment
teams of SBICs than in the private equity investment
community, and SBIC investments are more likely to
be made in low- or moderate-income communities. 28,29
One of the SBIR/STTR program goals is to encourage
women and underserved individuals-who are less
well represented in STEM fields-to participate in
innovation and entrepreneurship. The numbers of
women-owned, small-disadvantaged, and HUBZone
1
Throughout, "reasonable coverage" refers to data coverage of approximately 70 percent or more.
6
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
firms vary significantly by program and agency, with
Objective 1.3: Grow exporting
women-owned firms generally being more represented
in SBIR/STTR than HUBZone and small-disadvantaged
opportunities to help small
entrepreneurs.30
businesses across the country
expand into new markets
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
SBA international trade programs promote exports by
1. Does the SBIC program help small businesses
small businesses through loan and grant programs,
grow, and does this vary for underserved small
technical assistance, and counseling to advance
businesses? (LT)
economic growth. Small businesses can grow revenues,
2. What are effective resources and strategies to
diversify customer bases, and increase profits when
encourage diverse individuals to form innovative
they sell their goods or services into international
startups? (LT)
markets.31 In FY 2020, businesses that received support
through the SBA's international trade finance programs
had combined export sales of 3.3 billion dollars.32
External Research
Export sales supported by the State Trade Expansion
1. What needs do underserved entrepreneurs have
Program (STEP) have increased over the years, peaking
when starting STEM-focused small businesses, and
at $1.12 billion in FY 2017. Trade Show Exhibitions have
how can the SBA best support them? (ST)
supported the highest export sales with high return on
investment or high client counts. 33 Despite this success,
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. The SBA
recent data from the Census shows a slight decline
collects administrative data on firms that participate
(about three percent) in the number of small businesses
in its investment and innovation programs, including
that export over the last decade, with most of the
the number of firms, voluntarily self-reported owner
declines taking place in the last five years.34
demographics for small businesses financed by SBICs
(reasonable coverage) and SBIR/STTR programs
The SBA fills a market gap where the private sector
(reasonable coverage in recent years), and for some
perceives a risk in lending to credit-worthy small
programs, number of jobs supported. These datasets
businesses with certain export transactions. According
can be used to understand some aspects of growth
to a 2016 Small Business Exporters Association survey,
for participating firms, including analysis by owner
24 percent of small business respondents were
demographics. Further evidence on outcomes could
concerned with how they would obtain payment for
be gained through literature review, collaboration with
export sales, while 35 percent said it was more difficult
agencies administering programs, using administrative
to obtain trade financing than conventional business
data with the Census Bureau, and data collection
financing.35 Export working capital is particularly
directly from program participants and analysis of that
difficult to find for younger companies in need of
data. Literature review of existing research provides
smaller dollar loans. Although the SBA's core export
background knowledge on barriers that women and
loans meet this need, relatively few lenders and
other underrepresented populations face when creating
exporters take advantage of the SBA's core export loans.
innovation startups. This literature could be extended
Thus, expanding lender utilization of SBA's export
through mixed-methods research on strategies that the
programs is a key to meeting customer needs. In terms
SBA can employ to support these entrepreneurs.
of diversity of customers, in FY 2020, underserved
businesses benefitted from the SBA's core export loans
with about a third and a fifth of these loans going to
minority-owned and women-owned firms, respectively.
At the same time, relatively few U.S. small businesses
take advantage of SBA's export programs and exporting
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
|
Small Business Administration
7
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
in general, highlighting the opportunity for broader
Objective 1.4: Build back an
reach.
inclusive and proficient small
business contracting base
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
ready to compete for all federal
1. How can the SBA increase the use of its export
programs, and what barriers could be removed to
procurement opportunities
increase small business exporting? (LT)
The Federal Government has consistently met its
2. How has the decline in small business exporters
statutory goal of awarding 23 percent of small business-
affected different demographic groups, geographic
eligible contracting dollars to small businesses, yet
communities, and industries, and how can the SBA
opportunities remain to increase small business
address this decline through its programs? (LT)
participation in federal contracting. In FY 2019, the
Federal Government exceeded its prime contracting
goal with an achievement of 26.5 percent. 36 Despite this
External Research/Collaboration/Ongoing
success, small business procurement has concentrated
1. What effects do SBA export programs have on
in a few sectors, small businesses receive relatively
small business job creation, revenue, salaries, and
small dollar-value contracts,37 and fewer small
diversity of exporting firms, and what aspects of
businesses have been receiving contracts over time. 38
export programs cause these effects? (LT)
The SBA's Small Business Procurement Scorecard
grades agencies on meeting their Federal contracting
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. The SBA
goals. The scorecard has been found to influence
maintains administrative datasets for its export loan
agencies, but is also an area in which the SBA could
programs, including data on lenders, borrowers, and
consider refining its processes for maximum impact. 39,
40
loans. These data can be used to help determine areas
of lower utilization of loan programs. Qualitative
In FY 2020, the SBA assisted more than 33,000
analysis (e.g., interviews with lenders, borrowers,
businesses through its 8(a), 7(j), Mentor-Protégé, and
and grantees) can be used to identify barriers to
HUBZone programs.41 One evaluation demonstrated
participation. With respect to the decline in small
that the SBA's 7(j) training for 8(a) firms increases the
business exporters, Census data can provide the
likelihood of obtaining federal contracts from 47 percent
numbers of small business exporters over time,
to 59 percent. 42 Mentees in the SBA's All Small Mentor-
and literature review can be used to understand the
Protégé Program had a 58 percent success rate of
effects and causes of the decrease in exporters on
winning bids in FY 2019.43
various communities. Regarding program outcomes,
such as small business outcomes and diversity of
The SBA's business development programs have helped
exporters, both SBA and Census data can help to
underserved businesses successfully compete for
explain the outcomes of SBA export programs though
federal procurement opportunities, but opportunities
quantitative methods such as descriptive statistics
for increased representation in federal contracting
and quasi-experimental design. The SBA collects
still exist. Specifically, the Federal Government has
loan data on expected export sales from program
recently met its small-disadvantaged and service-
participants. STEP grantees report information on jobs
disabled veteran-owned contracting goals, has met its
supported, and counseling programs track the number
women-owned contracting goal twice, but has not met
of individuals supported through export training.
its HUBZone contracting goal.44 Regarding these
areas
Ongoing collaboration with Census can supplement
of disparity, evaluation has demonstrated that federal
this information with other economic outcomes for
agencies are more likely to achieve their HUBZone
participating firms and adds to the ability to create a
contracting goals by utilizing targeted marketing
matched sample of non-participating firms.
and outreach, matchmaking between prime and
8
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
subcontractors, and contracting with small businesses
demographic groups, and how experiences can be
with multiple socioeconomic designations.45
improved for underserved small businesses. To answer
these questions, the SBA will deploy web-based CX
With respect to customer-centric delivery, a recent
"touchpoint" surveys and conduct additional follow-up
evaluation of the Mentor-Protégé Program found that
surveys or interviews. Challenges include the fact that
factors that contribute to withdrawal from the program
touchpoint surveys are short, standardized, and contain
centered on the benefits each party expected to gain
limited open-ended responses, which necessitates the
and the quality of the mentor-protégé relationship.46
use of follow-up surveys or interviews to gain further
Protégés who continued in the program were much
insights. Additionally, demographic information may
more likely to report that the relationship benefitted
be challenging to collect; if demographic information
them and that they had positive relationships with their
is insufficient, the SBA can analyze at a minimum the
mentors.
program with which respondents interacted (indicating
that they identify as socially and economically
disadvantaged, women, or owners operating in
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
HUBZones).
1. How can the SBA advance equitable contracting
policies and streamline small business certification
In FY 2022, the SBA is evaluating the outcomes of its
in order to help more underserved small businesses
HUBZone Early Engagement Initiative, which fast tracks
win federal contracts? (ST)
the HUBZone certification process for businesses
2. How does SBA technical assistance impact small
judged to be substantially "procurement-ready." This
business performance, and how can firms be better
evaluation will address ways to streamline small
prepared to successfully participate and compete in
business certification so that underserved small
the federal marketplace? (LT)
businesses can promptly win federal contracts. In
FY 2022, the SBA is also evaluating the effectiveness and
efficiency of its Surveillance Reviews, which are annual
External Research
audits that assess whether federal Procurement Centers
1. What factors have caused the downward trend in
are providing the maximum practicable opportunity
the number of small businesses receiving prime
for small business participation in federal contracting.
contract awards, and how can the SBA reverse this
This evaluation will help the SBA understand what
trend? (LT)
processes best support small business participation in
federal contracting, including for underserved small
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. Literature
businesses.
review and collaboration with other agencies can help
to determine which federal contracting policies tend
The SBA tracks metrics for its business development
to disadvantage small businesses. To further support
programs. Quantitative analysis of contracts won
the goal of increasing equity in federal contracting,
(including number and timing, from beta.SAM.gov)
in FY 2023, the SBA will conduct an evaluation on
by participating firms can help answer questions
government contracting certification program customer
about contracting outcomes for program participants.
experience (CX). The evaluation will study experiences
Interviews, surveys, or focus groups could uncover the
of firms that apply for certification and participate
challenges with respect to winning contracts and firms'
in the SBA's government contracting certification
technical assistance needs. Interviews could further
programs. The study will identify strengths and areas
elucidate small business outcomes for trainees.
of improvement with respect to customer service,
technology (e.g., certification platforms), and the
In FY 2023, the SBA will evaluate 8(a) Program and field
certification process in general. The study will also
office efforts to deliver consistent, high-quality business
identify how customer experience differs across
development services to 8(a) firms. The evaluation will
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
|
Small Business Administration
9
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
examine business development services and program
Objective 1.5: Build an equitable
and field office processes, procedures, coordination,
communications, and reporting. The evaluation will
entrepreneurial ecosystem
also explore the influence of the above activities and
through tailored training and
outputs on short-term and intermediate outcomes.
counseling
This mixed-method evaluation will use quantitative
administrative data to examine outputs and outcomes
Entrepreneur participation in the SBA's training and
and collect qualitative data from the SBA's OBD, OFO,
counseling programs is associated with reported
and supporting offices. The functionality of the SBA's
likelihood to start a business, reported improvements
databases and reporting tools may limit data utilization
in business management practices, reported financial
and require manual matching. Additionally, varying
growth, and firm growth. Nearly two-thirds of
state and local COVID-19 pandemic restrictions may
participants changed their business and management
have altered typical business development activities.
practices after receiving assistance from a Small
Business Development Center, Women's Business
The SBA can track the number of firms winning federal
Center, or SCORE mentor. Participants who completed
contracts (beta.SAM.gov), and literature reviews can
more than three hours of counseling were more likely
help elucidate some factors that may have caused the
to report improved financial performance, higher
decline in small businesses winning federal contracts
employment growth, and greater likelihood to start a
(e.g., reports on Category Management47). Qualitative
business.48 Similarly, 65 percent of Emerging Leaders
analysis with federal procurement officials and small
program alumni reported that their businesses created
businesses could help determine both causes and ways
or maintained jobs, and 70 percent reported increased
to address the decline.
revenue.49
SBA counseling and training programs serve diverse
clients, such as women, socially and economically
disadvantaged entrepreneurs, veterans, and
entrepreneurs with disabilities. 50,51,52
Business
outcomes for SCORE, SBDC, and WBC participants have
generally been similar across demographic groups,
although rural and black-owned firms reported lower
revenue growth post participation than urban and
white-owned firms.5³ Recognizing the importance
of promoting equitable access to SBA's programs,
Congress created the Community Navigator Pilot
Program, which aims to reach more underrepresented
businesses through partnerships with organizations
with ties to communities. Some leading practices for
implementing a community navigator model have
been identified,54 and future evidence building can help
identify program outcomes.
Participants in the SBA's training and outreach
programs report satisfaction; for example, participants
of SCORE, SBDC, and WBC programs have reported
positive experiences, with 80 percent of clients finding
them useful. 55 Furthermore, the SBA is continually
10
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 1
identifying factors that promote customer success and
The SBA has current and ongoing evaluations planned
satisfaction. One evaluation found that stakeholder
to further the goal of increasing equity and customer-
engagement, outreach, and social support networks
centric focus. In FY 2022, the SBA is conducting an
influenced program recruitment, retention, and
evaluation to understand how to best serve diverse
satisfaction in the Boots to Business program.56 Through
entrepreneurs virtually. Due the COVID-19 pandemic,
program evaluation, the SBA Office of Field Operations
the SBA's Boots to Business program switched from in-
(OFO), as part of SBA's High-Impact Service Provider
person delivery to virtual training. The SBA will conduct
efforts, recently identified opportunities to enhance CX
a mixed-methods formative evaluation to examine the
such as streamlining access to information; improving
implementation and short-term results of the virtual
communication between headquarters, field offices,
program delivery. The SBA has also developed a logic
program staff, and customers; developing methods
model for the Community Navigator Pilot Program and
for tracking customers across SBA interactions; and
generated proposed program performance measures
continuously sharing CX data with district leaders.57
including the number of underserved businesses
served, application rates for SBA programs, and
outcomes like business sustainment, job creation, and
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
increased revenue.
1. What are the business outcomes (including access
to capital/financing) and impacts of the SBA's
In FY 2023, the SBA will conduct a formative
counseling, training, and outreach programs and
evaluation on the implementation and processes
services? (LT)
of the Community Navigator program. The study
2. How can the SBA's counseling, training, and
will help the SBA understand if the new initiative
outreach programs and services best contribute to
was implemented as intended, identify barriers and
the development of an equitable entrepreneurial
facilitators to implementing program activities, and
ecosystem? (LT)
assess whether the initiative is beginning to produce
3. How do participant outcomes and experiences
the intended outputs and outcomes. The mixed-
differ for new community-based programs (e.g.,
method implementation evaluation will draw on
the Community Navigator program), and what
administrative program data from the NOFA application
strategies from these programs can be adopted
and reported performance metrics. The SBA will
to promote equity in the SBA's other training and
also collect qualitative data from the SBA Office of
counseling programs? (LT)
Entrepreneurial Development and supporting SBA
offices, partners, community navigators, and potentially
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. Course
customers. The evaluation will be undertaken during
data (satisfaction, feedback) is collected for some SBA
early implementation, and disbursement schedules
counseling and training programs. As part of potential
are expected to occur on a rolling basis. Therefore,
program evaluation activities, program participants
sufficient time may not have passed to begin evaluating
could self-report on business outcomes as well as their
the initiative across all planned market segments.
experiences and business needs. These areas could be
Still, the evaluation will enable early insights to inform
analyzed by participant demographics to determine
changes and opportunities for improvements that
gaps in outcomes and experiences, and for ideas on
support overall implementation efforts.
programmatic improvements that promote equity.
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda |
Small Business Administration
11
STRATEGIC GOAL 2
Strategic Goal 2: Build Resilient Businesses and a
Sustainable Economy
Objective 2.1: Help small
did not.67 Firms that received PPP loans were also more
likely to report retaining and rehiring workers compared
businesses recover from the
with those who did not.68
pandemic and become more
resilient
The COVID-19 pandemic has disparately impacted
women-owned,65 minority-owned, and immigrant-
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly negatively
owned businesses.70,71
Equity assessments across
impacted small businesses. For example, 89.9 percent
COVID-19 relief programs are underway, but data
of small businesses surveyed in May 2020 reported a
availability issues limit the ability to draw complete
negative impact on their business, with 65.9 percent still
conclusions. As of May 2021, available data indicates
reporting a negative effect as of late November 2021.58
that for PPP borrowers in 2021, nearly 71 percent
Similarly, 78 percent of employer firms in one survey
of borrowers did not disclose their race and nearly
reported decreased revenue growth, and 46 percent
67 percent of borrowers did not disclose their ethnicity.
reported decreased employment growth in 2020.59
Fifty-six percent of borrowers did not disclose their
gender.72
Pandemic response legislation such as the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act)
After the initial rollout, legislative changes advanced
and American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) authorized new
equity in PPP loan distribution. One study found mixed
programs to help small businesses recover. These
evidence on PPP and COVID-EIDL equity, with a positive
programs provided the SBA with the largest outlay of
relationship found between minority makeup of a
capital in the Agency's history. As of early December
community and COVID-EIDL loan distribution. The study
2021, the SBA awarded over 16.5 million Paycheck
also found a positive relationship between number of
Protection Program (PPP) loans, COVID-Economic
PPP loans and minority makeup of a community, but a
Injury Disaster Loans (COVID-EIDL), and Targeted and
negative relationship when considering the dollars in
Supplemental Targeted EIDL Advances totaling over a
loans per employee.74
trillion dollars. 60, 61 As of November 2021, the SBA also
awarded over $41.9 billion in Restaurant Revitalization
The SBA has responded to over 132,000 inquiries
Fund (RRF) awards and Shuttered Venue Operators
regarding the PPP (as of April 2021) and made
Grants (SVOG) to over 121,000 restaurants and
modifications to its policies and systems to improve the
venues.62,63
flow of loans. The SBA also accelerated its Disaster Loan
Assistance Portal (DLAP) migration by several months
The SBA and other external researchers have begun to
to improve user security, which has improved the user
measure the outcomes of its pandemic relief programs.
experience.
Estimated effects of the PPP vary widely depending
on the data sources and methodology used,64 with
the number of jobs retained ranging from 18.6 million
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
(from loans through August 8, 202065 to 2.3 million
1. What effects did the SBA's pandemic recovery
(through June 2020) or less.66 Businesses receiving
programs have on small business outcomes (e.g.,
PPP, COVID-EIDL, and loan forgiveness relief were less
survival, employee retention, revenue and sales
likely to report revenue and employee-hour decreases
parity, etc.), and how did these vary by industry,
in the weeks after this relief, compared with firms that
geography, and owner demographics? (LT)
12
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 2
2. What policies, technologies, or best practices should
experimental methods to compare SBA pandemic
the SBA implement to help small businesses recover
recovery program participants with a comparison
and adapt to a post-COVID-19 environment? (ST)
group of similar businesses that did not participate
in the SBA's COVID-19 recovery programs. Challenges
for this evaluation center around data availability and
External Research/Collaboration
matching. Some data maintained by the Census Bureau,
1. To what extent do small businesses have emerging
including Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax records,
capital needs as they adapt to, recover from, and
may not be available for evaluations. Additionally,
grow after the COVID-19 pandemic? If businesses
SBA data may be of insufficient quality to produce an
have emerging needs, what are they?
appropriate number of matches during the data linking
phase. However, the SBA has linked other program data
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. Several
with Census datasets previously and found it to produce
methods can be used to understand the effects of the
sufficient matches for analysis.
SBA's pandemic recovery programs, including literature
reviews, collaboration with researchers and federal
In FY 2023, the SBA will better understand pandemic
agencies, internal administrative data analysis, and
program outcomes and ongoing business needs
future survey data collection. The SBA's internal records
thorough an SVOG program evaluation. The evaluation
include business location, industry, and-to a more
will assess if and how intended recovery outcomes
limited extent-owner demographics. Data on business
were met, including measuring the number of jobs
closures, business starts, and employment are also
supported and revenue earned by SVOG grantees. The
available through federal sources.
SBA will also evaluate divergence of planned versus
actual expenditures and businesses' ongoing recovery
The SBA is currently fielding a survey on satisfaction and
needs. The mixed-method evaluation will draw on
customer experience for the PPP, COVID-EIDL, Express
administrative program data from the SVOG Portal to
Bridge Loans, SVOG, and RRF programs, which includes
examine planned and actual expenditures, changes in
outcomes data on operating status, operating capacity,
revenue, and other reported business metrics. Spending
and employee retention. The SBA has posted its PPP,76
and outcomes will be analyzed by owner demographics
COVID-EIDL,77 SVOG,78 and RRF79 data publicly, making
and other business characteristics captured in the SBA's
it possible for outside researchers to approach this
System for Award Management. The SBA will also collect
priority question as well. Collaboration with the Federal
qualitative data from grantees in the form of a closeout
Research Division of the Library of Congress is also
survey, which asks grantees to rate the SVOG's impact
being planned to conduct an evaluation on pandemic
on reopening and fulfilling business needs. Focus group
relief programs. With respect to business needs post-
and interview data will reveal some of the ways in which
pandemic, the SBA has also participated with the
the SVOG impacted grantees. One challenge may be
Census Bureau to develop and collect data through the
obtaining closeout data from all grantees because grant
Small Business Pulse Survey.
closeout is dependent on award dates that varied and
because grantees may have permanently closed. To
In FY 2023, the SBA will also complete an evaluation
address this, the SBA plans repeated communications to
to determine the impacts of its pandemic recovery
businesses that do not complete the closeout process.
programs (PPP, COVID-EIDL, SVOG, and RRF) on
The SBA will be able to collect more information about
small business outcomes such as survival, employee
missing data such as outcomes and demographics
retention, and revenue and sales parity. The SBA will
through its Joint Statistical Project with the Census
match administrative data from its pandemic recovery
Bureau.
programs with data at the Census Bureau. No new data
collection is intended. The evaluation will use quasi-
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda |
Small Business Administration
13
STRATEGIC GOAL 2
Objective 2.2: Help prepare
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
small businesses and rebuild
1. How can the SBA increase use of its disaster loan
mitigation increase option and prepare for future,
communities affected by natural
more frequent disasters? (ST)
disasters
2. How do SBA disaster assistance loans contribute to
SBA Disaster Assistance Loans have been associated
post-disaster individual, business, and community
with business survival, growth, and revenue. For
rebuilding? (LT)
example, SBA Disaster Loans are associated with
increased business survival and growth after
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. The SBA is
floods, especially for businesses with fewer than 50
currently studying methods to increase the use of its
employees. 80 Similarly, family-owned businesses
disaster loan mitigation increase option. In FY 2022, the
receiving SBA loans after Hurricane Katrina were more
SBA will conduct an experiment to test new strategies
likely to survive. 81 One study found an association
for communicating about the mitigation option to
between SBA Disaster Loans and increased actual and
determine effects on use of this option.
perceived revenue after Hurricane Katrina;82 however,
another study failed to find revenue increases.83
Several quantitative analyses are in progress to
elucidate how SBA disaster assistance loans contribute
The SBA recognizes the need to adapt to increasing
to post-disaster rebuilding. The SBA has an ongoing
disaster frequency due to climate change,84 and this
partnership with the Risk Management and Decision
Processes Center at the Wharton School of the
topic is of interest for future evidence building. The SBA
is authorized to increase physical disaster loan amounts
University of Pennsylvania to conduct a series of
to fund mitigating measures to protect damaged or
quantitative analyses on the Disaster Loan program.
destroyed property from possible future disasters. Due
These analyses use the SBA's Disaster Loan Assistance
to increased frequency of disasters, the SBA is interested
data and Experian credit reports and currently focus
in increasing borrower uptake of its increase option. A
on creating a profile of how the program is used by
recent program evaluation found that individuals who
households and firms, evaluating the program with
used the mitigation increase option were most likely to
respect to reducing credit market disruptions that
be flood survivors and tended to be better resourced
increase the cost of disasters for households and
than non-borrowers. Lack of knowledge and resources
firms, and understanding the role of the program in
about the mitigation option were barriers for both
the broader context of public and private disaster
borrowers and loan officers, and borrowers reported
management mechanisms.
fear and confusion during the process. 85
In FY 2023, the SBA will continue an ongoing evaluation
Performance metrics indicate efficiency of disaster loan
to determine the impacts of SBA Physical Disaster
Assistance Loans on small business outcomes and
processing and efforts to reach customers promptly
after disaster hits. In FY 2020, 78 percent of customers
recovery. The study addresses how these loans impact
were satisfied with SBA Disaster Loan approvals. The
small business outcomes such as revenue, employment,
SBA tracks metrics on the speed of opening Disaster
and survival, and how they impact the timing of
Loan Outreach and Business Recovery Centers and
small business recovery as measured by revenue and
loan disbursements within standards to best support
employment. The SBA is using administrative data
disaster survivors and met these standards 100 percent
from the SBA Disaster Assistance Loan program, which
of the time in FY 2020. 86 With respect to equity, one post-
is being matched with data at the Census Bureau. The
Katrina study found that women were more likely to
evaluation will use quasi-experimental methods to
apply for Disaster Loans; however, they were less likely
compare recipients of SBA Disaster Assistance Loans
to receive them and received lower loan amounts. 87
to a comparison group of similar businesses that did
not receive these loans. Challenges for this evaluation
14
Small Business Administration
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 2
center around data availability and matching. Some
number of matches during the data linking phase.
data maintained by the Census Bureau, including
However, the SBA has linked this data with other
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax records, may not be
datasets previously and found it to produce sufficient
available for evaluations. Additionally, SBA data may
matches for analysis.
be of insufficient quality to produce an appropriate
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda | Small Business Administration
15
STRATEGIC GOAL 3
Strategic Goal 3: Implement Strong
Stewardship of Resources for Greater Impact
Objective 3.1: Strategically
added the SBA to its "High Risk Series" list due to risk of
improper payments and fraud.93
manage resources by integrating
quality data, evidence, and risk in
In FY 2021, the SBA partnered with the U.S. General
decision-making processes
Service Administration's Office of Evaluation Sciences
to investigate how burden reduction might be used to
The SBA recognizes the importance of evidence to
promote equitable distribution of services. The study
inform decision-making and improve its resource
found that after one U.S. city reduced its paperwork
management functions. Across the SBA's resource
requirements to apply for COVID-19 relief funds,
management functions, existing evidence indicates
completed application rates increased for businesses
several resource management strengths as well
owned by members of historically underserved groups
as opportunities for improvement. In the area
as well as for businesses owned by members of
of performance management, the SBA tracks
historically well-represented groups.94
approximately 100 performance metrics and has
produced over 40 evaluation, fact-finding, and policy
The SBA tracks employee satisfaction with its financial
analysis evidence assets as of FY 2020. The SBA's
management services; in FY 2020, satisfaction was
Capacity Assessment found the greatest opportunity for
rated a 4.6 out of 5. Negative responses are distributed
the SBA to expand its statistical practice capacity. 88,89
to managers who follow up with guidance and
development for staff.95
The SBA consistently has one of the highest small
business utilization rates in federal contracting;
in FY 2020, the SBA awarded 80 percent of eligible
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
contracting dollars to small businesses. An evaluation of
1. How can the SBA support program efforts to
the SBA's Advanced Acquisition strategy recommended
increase equitable access to its services (e.g., by
enhancing communication and proactive engagement
reducing paperwork requirements, streamlining
from both acquisition and program offices and
forms, leveraging data, etc.)? (LT)
developing Integrated Procurement Teams for highly
2. How can the SBA minimize fraud and manage fraud
complex acquisitions.90
risk within its programs? (LT)
An independent audit found that in FY 2019, the SBA
Methods and Data for Evidence Building.
had met reporting requirements for the Improper
Retrospective quantitative analyses can also be
Payments Act of 2002, conducted risk assessments
conducted exploring whether different levels of
for applicable programs, and taken steps to reduce
applicant burden are associated with increased
improper payments in programs previously identified
diversity of applicants, as well as whether lower levels
as targets for reduction (7(a), 504, and Disaster Loans).91
of burden are associated with increased fraud. Fraud
Despite efforts to reduce improper payment in its
and risk can also be studied through literature review
ongoing programs, the COVID-19 pandemic has added
and risk analysis. The SBA completed a Fraud Risk
additional challenges due the need for rapid and large-
Assessment for its PPP and COVID-EIDL programs.
scale disbursement of COVID recovery loans.92 GAO
has
16
Small Business Administration
| Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
STRATEGIC GOAL 3
Objective 3.2: Build an inclusive
External Research
and high-performing workforce
1. How will emerging workforce trends and new
technologies (e.g., AI, New Pay through Shared
Ongoing evidence building aims to help the SBA
Services, telework) impact the SBA's human capital
strengthen its workforce planning. The SBA leadership
needs? (ST)
cohort comprises 16.4 percent of the workforce, making
2. What recruitment flexibilities and strategies (e.g.,
effective leadership succession planning critical to
remote workers) can best promote equity, diversity,
maintaining the SBA's ability to deliver its mission.
inclusion, and engagement, and how can these
However, nearly one-third of the SBA's workforce is
flexibilities be leveraged to create a competitive
retirement eligible, with retirement eligibility projected
advantage? (ST)
to grow to 42 percent by 2022.96 The SBA is currently
completing an evaluation that examines two of the
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. To
SBA's primary talent development strategies for
understand how the SBA can recruit a diverse
preparing staff leadership advancement and aims
workforce, the Agency can build evidence on
to identify the gaps in staff ability to assume more
recruitment strategies by conducting literature reviews,
advanced duties.
analyzing its use of hiring authorities, analyzing
demographics of its current applicants and hires, and
The most recently published EEO workforce reports
collaborating with other agencies to understand best
(FY 2019) indicate that, compared with the Federal
practices. The SBA can study engagement through
Government, the SBA has a higher percentage of
the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, but studying
federal employees self-identifying as female, Hispanic/
inclusion may require qualitative data collection and/or
Latino, Black/African-American, Asian, or as having a
analysis of best practices in other agencies. The SBA has
disability or targeted disability. However, the SBA has
or is producing several evidence products that inform
fewer employees that self-identify as Native Hawaiian/
workforce development strategies, including a Talent
Pacific Islander, American Indian/Alaska Native, or two
Development Needs Survey, a Workforce Planning Gap
or more races. At the SES-level, individuals identifying
Analysis, and a Dual-Rater Competency Assessment.
as White and as male are over-represented among SES
employees compared with the overall SBA workforce,
To build evidence on emerging workforce trends and
although these numbers are less far from parity than
technologies that affect human capital needs, the
they are in the Federal Government overall. 97 In FY 2020,
SBA can conduct literature reviews on topics such
SBA employees reported a 72 percent job satisfaction
technology trends (e.g., AI, New Pay through Shared
rate on the FEVS as well as a high level of engagement-
Services) and other emerging trends in government
both measures that have been steadily rising over
work.99 Recruitment flexibilities and strategies, and their
recent years. However, new hire retention (73 percent-
contribution to creating diverse, inclusive, and engaging
defined as retention of new hires for two years or more)
environments, can be studied in collaboration with
was lower than in prior years.98
other agencies and through literature reviews, as well
as through analyzing existing datasets within the SBA.
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
The SBA can analyze its administrative data on its use of
hiring flexibilities, telework, and remote work and can
1. How can the SBA recruit, train, and retain a diverse,
study factors like engagement from the FEVS and recent
inclusive, and engaged workforce with the right skills
telework surveys.
to meet the Agency's mission requirements? (LT)
2. How can the SBA develop the current workforce to
adapt and respond to emerging needs? (LT)
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
|
Small Business Administration
17
STRATEGIC GOAL 3
Objective 3.3: Develop and deploy
investments; in FY 2020, the SBA completed 81 percent
of its priority IT investments on time.102
technology-driven solutions to
enhance mission delivery
Key Research and Evaluation Questions
In recent years the SBA has invested significantly in
1. How can the SBA improve the experience of
assessing its IT platforms and taking steps to modernize
both its internal and external customers through
and secure them. For example, the SBA has assessed
technology modernization? (ST)
IT needs and ways to modernize its technology
platforms, which has led to an increase in its FITARA
2. How can the SBA leverage new technology and
score from a D+ in May 2018 to a B+ in June of 2019.100
cybersecurity tools to mitigate security threats and
The SBA's Office of the Inspector General will also be
prevent fraud? (LT)
evaluating the effectiveness of the SBA's information
security program and practices annually to improve and
Methods and Data for Evidence Building. The SBA
institutionalize security policies and procedures. 101
has instituted an Information Technology Customer
Satisfaction Rate metric, derived from quarterly
The SBA tracks additional metrics around its IT
customer satisfaction surveys. This metric will provide
functions to assess and improve areas including
a continuous source of evidence regarding service
its modernization efforts and timely completion of
delivery. A foundation of evidence related to using
priority investments. For example, the Agency tracks
technology to mitigate risk and fraud can be built
the percentage of the SBA's enterprise-wide cloud
through literature reviews, including audits (e.g., OIG, 103
applications completed compared to those applications
GAO104, government best practices, and government
standards.
still needing cloud migration, and in FY 2020 had
migrated 62 percent of its applications. The SBA
also monitors efficiency in completing its priority IT
18
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
APPENDIX
Appendix A: Endnotes
1
Evidence may come from a variety of sources, including program evaluations, performance data, audits, policy analyses, and traditional
research.
2
Public Law 115 - 435 - Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018
3
www.sba.gov/evaluation
4
ELA questions for strategic goals 1 and 2 address strategic questions (i.e., questions about mission programs, policies, and regulations),
and strategic goal 3 questions address operational questions (i.e., questions about operations concerning human capital, grants,
acquisition, financial, and information technology management).
5
Executive Order on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government
6
How Documentation Burdens Affect the Equitable Distribution of Small Business Relief Funding (GSA, 2021)
7
Who Receives Access to Small Business Relief? A Simulation-based Approach (GSA, 2021)
8
Challenges and Opportunities for Pursuing Equitable Distribution of Small Business Relief (GSA, 2021)
9
An Analysis of the Factors Lenders Use to Ensure Their SBA Borrowers Meet the Credit Elsewhere Requirement (The Urban Institute, 2008)
10
Finance and Growth at the Firm Level: Evidence from SBA Loans (Journal of Finance, 2017)
11
A Performance Analysis of SBA's Loan and Investment Programs (The Urban Institute, 2008)
12 The Impact of SBA Lending Activity on Micropolitan Statistical Areas in the U.S. Southeast (The International Journal of Business and
Finance Research, 2017)
13
U.S. Small Business Administration Loans and U.S. State-level Employment (Journal of Economics and Finance, 2019).
14
Evaluation of SBA's Microloan Program Outcomes (SBA, Forthcoming)
15
Access to Capital Among Young Firms, Minority-ownec Firms, Women-owned Firms, and High-tech Firms Research Study (SBA, 2013)
16
Minority Owned Employer Businesses and their Credit Market Experiences in 2017 (SBA, 2020)
17
Small Business Administration 7(a) Loan Guaranty Program (CRS, 2019)
18
Evaluation of Surety Bond Guarantee Program (SBA, 2020)
19
Finance and Growth at the Firm Level: Evidence from SBA Loans (Journal of Finance, 2017)
20
PPP Data (SBA, 2021)
21 National Economic Impacts from the National Cancer Institute SBIR/STTR Program (National Cancer Institute, 2019)
22 National Economic Impacts from the Navy SBIR/STTR Program, 2000-2013 (TechLink, Montana State University and University of Colorado
Boulder, 2014)
23 National Economic Impacts from the DOD SBIR/STTR Program, 1995-2018 (Department of Defense, 2019)
24
Measuring the Role of the SBIC Program in Small Business Job Creation (Library of Congress, 2017)
25
SBIC Rural Investments Environmental Scan and Evaluability Assessment (SBA, 2020)
26
SBA Small Business Investment Company Program (CRS, 2019)
27
Measuring the Role of the SBIC Program in Financing Small Businesses (Library of Congress, 2017)
28
Measuring the Representation of Women and Minorities in the SBIC Program (Library of Congress, 2016)
29
Small Business Administration and Job Creation (CRS, 2019)
30
SBA SBIR STTR FY18 Annual Report (SBA, 2018)
31
Do Jobs in Export Industries Still Pay More? And Why? (Department of Commerce International Trade Administration, 2010)
32
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
33
Evaluation of State Trade Expansion Program (STEP) Outcomes and Best Practices (SBA, 2021)
34
Calculated from the U.S. Census Bureau's annual press release, Profile of U.S. Importing and Exporting Companies
35
Small Business Exporting Survey 2016 (National Small Business Association, 2016)
36
Government-Wide Performance FY2019 Small Business Procurement Scorecard (SBA, 2020)
37
Evaluation of the Small Business Procurement Goals Established in Section 15(g) of the Small Business Act (SBA, 2014)
38
Federal Supplier Base Continued to Shrink in Fiscal 2018 (Bloomberg Law, 2019)
39
Evaluation of SBA's Small Business Procurement Scorecard (SBA, 2021)
40 Actions Needed to Improve Confidence in Small Business Procurement Scorecard (GAO, 2018)
41
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
42
7(j) Training Program for 8(a) Participants Evaluation Report (SBA, 2019)
43
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
44
Annual data available at SBA.gov: Small Business Procurement Scorecard Overview
45
Evaluation of Factors for Reaching the HUBZone Contracting Goal (SBA, 2018)
46 Evaluation of Withdrawals and Terminations from SBA's All Small Mentor-Protégé Program (SBA, 2020)
47 GAO-21-40, Federal Buying Power: OMB Can Further Advance Category Management Initiative by Focusing on Requirements, Data, and
Training (GAO, 2020)
48
Study of Entrepreneurial Development Resources (SBA, 2013)
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
Small Business Administration
19
APPENDIX
49
Emerging Leaders 2020 (SBA, 2020)
50
Office of Women's Business Ownership (sba.gov)
51
Office of Small Business Development Centers (sba.gov)
52
Office of Veterans Business Development (sba.gov)
53
Study of Entrepreneurial Development Resources (SBA, 2013)
54
Information Notice 6000-806503, Use of Community Navigators to Provide Technical Assistance (SBA, 2021)
55
Study of Entrepreneurial Development Resources (SBA, 2013)
56
Formative Evaluation of the Boots to Business Program (SBA, 2018)
57
SBA Office of Field Operations Customer Experience Data Evaluation (SBA, 2020)
58
Small Business Pulse Survey Data (Census, 2021)
59
Small Business Credit Survey: 2021 Report on Employer Firms (Federal Reserve System, 2021)
60
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Report: Approvals through 05/31/2021 (SBA, 2021)
61 SBA Disaster Assistance Update: Nationwide Economic Injury Disaster Loans COVID-19, December 2 (SBA, 2021)
62
Restaurant Revitalization Fund (RRF) Report, Approvals through 06/30/2021 (SBA, 2021)
63
Shuttered Venue Operators Grant (SVOG) Public Report - As of Midday 29 Nov 2021 (SBA, 2021)
64
Ten Days Late and Billions of Dollars Short: The Employment Effects of Delays in Paycheck Protection Program Financing (Federal Reserve
Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2021)
65
The Job-Preservation Effects of Paycheck Protection Program Loans (Office of Economic Policy, Department of the Treasury, 2020)
66
An Evaluation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata (MIT Working Paper, 2020)
67
Did the Small Business Administration's COVID-19 Assistance go to the Hard Hit Firms and Bring the Desired Relief? (Journal of Economics
and Business, 2021)
68
Small Business Credit Survey 2021 Report on Employer Firms (Federal Reserve System, 2021)
69
Special Report on Women-Owned Small Businesses During COVID-19 (US Chamber of Commerce, 2020)
70 COVID-19, Small Business Owners, and Racial Inequality (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020)
71
The Impact of Covid-19 on Small Business Owners: Evidence of Early-Stage Losses from the April 2020 Current Population Survey (National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2020)
72
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Report: Approvals through 05/31/2021 (SBA, 2021)
73 Fact Sheet: Changes to Paycheck Protection Program by Biden-Harris Administration Increase Equitable Access to Relief (SBA, 2021)
74
Did the $660 Billion Paycheck Protection Program and $220 Billion Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program Get Disbursed to Minority
Communities in the Early Stages of COVID-19? (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2021)
75
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
76
PPP FOIA Dataset (SBA, 2021)
77
COVID-19 EIDL Dataset (SBA, 2021)
78
Shuttered Venue Operators Grantees Dataset (SBA, 2021)
79
Restaurant Revitalization Fund (RRF) FOIA Dataset (SBA, 2021)
80
Small Business Vulnerability to Floods and the Effects of Disaster Loans (Small Business Economics, 2017)
81
Survival and Success of Family-Owned Small Businesses after Hurricane Katrina: Impact of Disaster Assistance and Adaptive Capacity
(Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 2018)
82 The Long-Term Impact of Disaster Loans: The Case of Small Businesses after Hurricane Katrina (Sustainability, 2018)
83
The Effect of Small Business Administration (SBA) Disaster Loans on Revenues of Small Businesses in Mississippi After Hurricane Katrina
(Southern Agricultural Economics Association, 2017)
84
SBA Climate Change Adaptation Plan (SBA, 2012)
85
Evaluation of Characteristics and Perceptions of Disaster Assistance Mitigation Loan Option Borrowers (SBA, 2021)
86
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
87
The Demand for Post-Katrina Disaster Aid: SBA Disaster Loans and Small Businesses in Mississippi (Journal of Contingencies and Crisis
Management, 2016)
88
SBA Evidence Capacity Assessment (SBA, Forthcoming)
89 U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
90
Evaluation of SBA Acquisition Planning (SBA, 2020)
91
Independent Auditors' Report on SBA's Compliance with IPERA (SBA, 2020)
92
Small Business Administration: COVID-19 Loans Lack Controls and Are Susceptible to Fraud (GAO, 2020)
93
GAO-21-119SP, High Risk Series: Dedicated Leadership Needed to Address Limited Progress in Most High-Risk Areas (GAO, 2021)
94 How Documentation Burdens Affect the Equitable Distribution of Small Business Relief Funding (GSA, 2021)
95
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
96
U.S. Small Business Administration, 2018-2020 Talent Development Plan
97
Annual Reports on the Federal Workforce, FY 2019 (EEOC, 2021)
98
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
20
Small Business Administration
|
Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
99
The Future of Work in Government (Deloitte Insights, 2019)
100 U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
101 U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
102
U.S. Small Business Administration FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification and FY 2020 Annual Performance Report (SBA, 2021)
103 Top Management and Performance Challenges Facing the Small Business Administration in FY 2021 (SBA, 2020)
104 Information Technology: Agencies Need to Develop Modernization Plans for Critical Legacy Systems (GAO, 2019)
APPENDIX
This page intentionally left blank.
22
Small Business Administration
| Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Enterprise Learning Agenda
1953
U.S. Small Business Administration
Office of Program Performance, Analysis, and Evaluation
409 Third Street, S.W.
Washington, DC 20416
