USA
Social Security Administration (SSA)
Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
February 10, 2022
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Table of Contents
Executive Summary
2
Summary of Early Accomplishments
4
Areas of Focus
9
Action Plan to Identify Inequities in Our Programs and Services
9
Action Plan to Identify and Address Systemic Barriers to Program Participation
11
Action Plan to Ensure Equitable Service for Unrepresented Claimants in the Disability
Application Process
14
Action Plan to Increase Gender Equity and Equality in Our Programs
17
Action Plan to Increase Equitable Access to Our Research Grants and Procurement Opportunities
for Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Minority Serving Institutions, and Small and
Disadvantaged Businesses
19
Conclusion
21
1
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Executive Summary
Social Security is the nation's largest federal program, serving as an insurance program and
safety net for millions of people. Our vision is to provide income security for the diverse
populations we serve, including those in underserved communities, 1 people with disabilities,
workers, and their families. Our intent is to serve all who are eligible for our programs.
However, the design of our administrative system can pose barriers to people who have few
resources and may need our programs the most. To reduce barriers in our administrative system,
we will increase collection of race and ethnicity data to determine whether our programs are
equitably serving our applicants and beneficiaries, revise our policies and practices to expand
options for service delivery, ensure equitable access to unrepresented claimants in the disability
application process, decrease burdens for people who identify as gender diverse or transgender in
the Social Security Number card application process, and increase access to our research grant
programs for Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority Serving Institutions and
procurement opportunities for small and disadvantaged businesses.
Since 1987, there has been a huge decline in race and ethnicity data in our records. This makes it
more difficult for us to monitor the fair treatment of people of color in our programs. To
determine whether administrative barriers disproportionately affect some groups more than
others, we will increase the collection of the race and ethnicity of the people participating in our
programs.
The process of applying for our programs and services was initially designed to be carried out
primarily in-person due to the difficulty and length of the Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
program application. Although we have more than 1,200 field offices across the country, people
in rural areas and on Native American reservations may not have a field office nearby or may
have limited transportation options to travel to a field office that is far away. Further, people
who work in jobs that do not provide paid leave may lose earnings if they take time off to come
to a field office. People of color and women are disproportionately likely to hold jobs that do not
provide benefits such as paid leave. This adds a greater barrier to accessing our programs. To
improve access to our programs and services, we are reducing the need for in-person visits
through simplified, online applications and expansion of online and telephone services.
Claimants applying for Disability (DI) or SSI Disability must obtain and submit many
documents, including medical evidence. Some claimants get attorney or non-attorney
representatives to assist with this process. However, representatives' fees are based on awarded
1
Executive Order No. 13985, 86 FR 7009 (January 20, 2021). Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved
Communities Through the Federal Government. The Executive Order defines the term "underserved communities" as
populations sharing a particular characteristic, as well as geographic communities, that have been systematically denied a full
opportunity to participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life such as Black, Latino, and Indigenous and Native
American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and other persons of color; members of religious minorities; lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities; persons who live in rural areas; and persons
otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality.
2
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
back benefits. This is a disincentive for representing SSI Disability applicants in favor of DI
applicants, whose benefits are typically higher. There is evidence that although African
American people are more likely to have a disability², they are less likely to be approved for
disability benefits than White people. 3 Considering this, we will assess whether African
American claimants are less likely to have a representative than White claimants, research
whether claimants who have representatives are more likely to receive disability benefits, reach
out to claimants who do not have representatives to prepare them for their disability hearings and
inform them of their right to representation, and work with professional associations of
representatives to create incentives to increase their representation of disability program
applicants.
An additional administrative challenge is that our forms (e.g., Application for a Social Security
Card) provide for a sex designation to identify only as either male or female. This can pose
burdens for people who identify as gender-diverse or transgender.4 We also require people
to
provide legal or medical documentation to change their sex designation on our records. To
reduce these administrative burdens, we will explore self-attestation to change a person's sex
designation on our records without requiring legal or medical documentation.
Finally, the share and dollar amount of research contracts and grants that go to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs5 is
disproportionately low. We plan to expand our engagement with these institutions and increase
opportunities to support research aligned with our DI and SSI programs and the diverse
populations we serve. We also want to strengthen our ties and promote our contracting
opportunities to small and disadvantaged businesses, which include woman-owned small
businesses, service-disabled veteran-owned businesses, and small business contractors in
Historically Underutilized Business (HUB) Zones.
We will hold ourselves accountable by reporting our progress to Congress, the Executive Office
of the President, and external stakeholders advocating for the diverse populations we serve.
2 Goodman, N. et al., National Disability Institute, Financial Inequality: Disability, Race, and Poverty in America (2019).
Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://www.nationaldisabilityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/disability-race-
poverty-in-america.pdf.
3 U.S. Government Accountability Office, GAO-HRD-92-56, Social Security: Racial Difference in Disability Decisions
Warrants Further Investigation (1992).
4 Gender diverse: This term is an umbrella term used to describe gender identities that demonstrate a diversity of expression
beyond the binary framework of male or female e.g., non-binary, intersex, gender non-confirming persons, genderqueer, or X
gender. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://genderrights.org.au/information-hub/what-is-gender-diversity/
Transgender: People with a gender identity that is different from the sex assigned to them at birth. Someone who was assigned
the male sex at birth but who identifies as female is a transgender woman. Likewise, a person assigned the female sex at birth but
who identifies as male is a transgender man. A person who has a gender identity other than the traditional definitions of male or
female may simply self-identify as transgender. Moreover, some people who would fit this definition of transgender do not
identify themselves as such, and identify simply as men and women, consistent with their gender identity.
5 MSIs include Predominantly Black Institutions (PBIs), Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs), Tribal Colleges and Universities
(TCUs), Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander Serving Institution (AANAPISI), Alaska Native- or Native
Hawaiian-Serving Institutions (ANNHSI), and Native American Non-Tribal Institutions (NANTI).
3
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Summary of Early Accomplishments
To identify inequities in our programs and services, we introduced methods to increase our
data collection on race and ethnicity. On November 4, 2021, we issued guidance to our front-
line employees to encourage applicants to voluntarily provide race and ethnicity data during the
Social Security Number (SSN) card application process. We also updated the instructions for the
Application for a Social Security Card to encourage members of the public to provide voluntary
responses to race and ethnicity questions.6
We have begun identifying and addressing systemic barriers to program participation by:
Conducting an extensive analysis of every question on the lengthy and complicated SSI
application to determine which questions could be removed or revised. Based on our
analysis, we plan to simplify the SSI application process. This includes clarifying some
questions for improved readability by applicants and our front-line employees. We are
also developing an online version of the SSI application that tailors the questions an
applicant receives based on their responses.
Developing a new online tool (targeted for release in March 2022) that receives requests
to schedule appointments for people who want to file for SSI and other benefits (e.g.,
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program7) This online tool records the appointment
request date as a person's protective filing date, commonly known as the date a person
initially notifies us of their intent to apply for benefits. The protective filing date secures
the person's SSI application filing date if they file within 60 days.
8
Creating and running a national communications campaign from September through
November 2021 in support of the Administration's effort to inform non-tax filers,
including SSI beneficiaries, of their potential eligibility for the Child Tax Credit. Code
for America, a non-governmental organization that identifies uses of technology to break
down barriers and improve government service, estimates that our campaign generated
34,313 filed claims of which 15,710 were found eligible. This amounted to $56 million
in tax benefits and was the second highest number of referrals to GetCTC.org.
Working together with the Department of Labor and the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission to examine current and potential research on employment discrimination-
one of the root causes of income inequality-and how employers can be held
accountable.
Asking for public comments on how to streamline the Continuing Disability Review
(CDR) form and improve the form's readability. To further reduce burden for
beneficiaries, we are developing an online version of the CDR form.
6 Application for a Social Security Card. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://www.ssa.gov/forms/ss-5.pdf.
7 We assist Social Security Income applicants and recipients with completing a SNAP application only if they live in a SSI
household, as defined in SI 01801.005, Overview of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Benefits, and per our
Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S. Department of Agriculture/Food and Nutrition Service.
8 GN 00204.100, Protective Filing. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/Inx/0200204010
9
In partnership with the Department of Treasury, Code for America provided us with this data.
4
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Engaging a diverse group of external stakeholders at the regional and national levels,
including Tribal nations, to reach people from underserved communities during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
We established partnerships with more than 3,000 community- and faith-based
organizations and recruited 650 field office employees to serve as Vulnerable
Populations Liaisons. These field office liaisons receive referrals and process
SSI applications from these organizations. We also promoted 100 of our field
office employees to the newly created position of Vulnerable Populations
Experts to review quality, timeliness, and consistency of the applications
received from these organizations. Our outreach efforts with these organizations
helped us obtain 1,743 SSI applications that we might not have obtained
otherwise.
We meet with the advocate stakeholder workgroups led by agency executives on
a bimonthly basis. We also meet with sub-workgroups on a biweekly basis, all
to develop evidence-based policy recommendations that we can pursue to
address the needs of people facing barriers in accessing our services.
We used stakeholder input to adjust our policies and procedures and to expand
our online and telephone services so that people can conduct business with us
without having to visit one of our field offices. In FY 2021, we released a
Change of Address application to allow callers who properly verify their identity
to change their address and/or telephone number without needing to visit one of
our field offices.
We are implementing our "Tribal Consultation and Call to Action Plan" to
strengthen Tribal consultation, increase outreach efforts, and improve service
delivery.
Hosting a National Disability Forum with nearly a thousand attendees, in September
2021, which focused on "Equity in SSA Programs: Hidden Barriers," and included
panelists from our stakeholder community. The panelists represented more diverse
interests than prior forums. As a result of the feedback received during the forum, we
will assess our medical evidence rules to adequately reflect a broader set of healthcare
providers who serve people facing barriers in accessing healthcare. We will also consider
revising the list of healthcare providers who qualify as "acceptable medical sources."
Meeting with advocate groups representing the Asian American and Native American
Pacific Islander, Black, Hispanic, and elder communities. We developed and published
our Fiscal year (FY) 2022-2023 Language Access Plan on December 2, 2021 with
relevant insights from these conversations. The Language Access Plan aligns with our
limited English proficiency policy and our strategic planning efforts for FYs 2022-2026.
Issuing a temporary final rule for the musculoskeletal disorders listings to help address
COVID-19 pandemic related barriers that prevented people from timely access to
healthcare. The rule temporarily changes the "close proximity of time" requirement from
four months to 12 months to reflect a reasonable timeframe for medical evidence
showing the level of severity needed to meet a musculoskeletal disorder listing. This
5
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
temporary rule will remain in effect through the emergency pandemic period. We will
continue to assess related information that will allow us to respond to public comment at
the appropriate time.
Revising our In-Kind Support and Maintenance policy to increase the tolerance from $5
to $20. We use this tolerance to determine if a SSI recipient is paying an equal share of
their household expenses in certain living arrangements. The revised policy reduces
administrative burdens on SSI recipients because it limits the number of times that we
redetermine their eligibility and benefit levels. It may also increase SSI applicants'
eligibility for benefits or recipients' benefit amounts.
As an initial step to ensuring equitable service for unrepresented claimants in the disability
application process, we provided training to our judges to raise awareness of unconscious bias
in the context of legal decision making. As a result of the training, we are looking at ways to
improve services and bring awareness to our judges of equity issues in the disability application
process. Because of the September 2021 National Disability Forum noted above, we are
considering ways to encourage representation of disability program applicants, especially SSI
disability applicants. For instance, we are evaluating whether the current maximum fee of
$6,000 that attorney and non-attorney representatives receive under the fee agreement process is
enough.
To increase gender equity and equality, in June 2021, we submitted a report to the White
House Gender Policy Council (GPC). This report informed the Government-wide strategy on
gender equity and equality. In July and August 2021, we attended the first and second rounds of
GPC Interagency Working Group meetings centered on issues such as women's economic
security and labor force participation, women and girls' education and leadership, gender-based
violence, and women's health and rights. On February 3, 2022, we issued guidance to our field
office employees on Accepting Documents with a Non-binary Sex Designation or "X" for
Enumeration Requests (original SSN card application, replacement SSN card applications, and
updates to our NUMIDENT record) when evidentiary documents include non-binary sex
designation, such as an X.10
To increase equitable access to our research grant programs and procurement
opportunities for Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs), and small and disadvantaged businesses, we had meetings with these
institutions and businesses in Summer 2021. These stakeholders reported a lack of awareness of
our research grant programs and procurement opportunities and recommended that we establish
direct communications with HBCUs, MSIs, and small and disadvantaged businesses. To
increase our engagement with these institutions, we have:
10 EM-22005, Accepting Documents with a Non-binary Sex Designation or "X" for Enumeration Requests. Accessed on
February 10, 2022 from http://policynet.ba.ssa.gov/reference.nsf/Inx/02022022010306PM
6
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Developed a Request for Applications designed to increase collaboration by
predominantly White research institutions with HBCUs and MSIs by encouraging
applicants to:
Engage with HBCUs, MSIs, scholars of color, and people from underserved
communities, including people with disabilities.
Use Community Engaged Methods as part of their project design, which asks for
the inclusion of people from the most affected communities in the development of
research design, data collection, analysis, and publishing of findings.
Incorporate people of color, people from underserved communities, and/or those
with lived experiences (i.e., people from the most affected communities) as part
of the research team.
Increased outreach to HBCUs in the Analyzing Relationships between Disability,
Rehabilitation, and Work program. 11
Increased the amount of individual grant funding from $10,000 to $15,000 to
make these opportunities more attractive to graduate students, including those
from HBCUs. We increased the funding amount to be closer to the amount
currently offered by other programs that fund graduate research. This effort may
increase diversity among researchers working on our projects, improve collection
of research data that are more representative of the populations we serve, and
ensure that our research dollars are spent in an equitable manner.
Encouraged the four Retirement and Disability Research Consortium (RDRC) 12 centers
to expand their researcher networks to include scholars from HBCUs. Eight out of 71 FY
2021's RDRC projects involve scholars from HBCUs. 13 We also provided funding
for
three new training programs, one of which is run by the University of Illinois Chicago, a
designated MSI.
Awarded a grant of $ $10,000 to Delaware State University, an HBCU, to conduct
disability research.
Developed a list of 34 HBCUs to target for marketing opportunities.
We attend monthly interagency workgroup meetings with the White House Initiative on
Advancing Educational Equity, Excellence, and Economic Opportunity through Historically
Black Colleges and Universities. 14 At these meetings, we share best practices and information
about Federal opportunities for HBCUs relating to grants and contracts. We developed an
11 Policy Research, Inc. Analyzing Relationships between Disability, Rehabilitation and Work Small Grant Program. Accessed
on February 10, 2022 from https://ardraw.policyresearchinc.org/
12 Social Security Administration's Extramural Projects. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/extramural/#RDRC.
13 These scholars are from Bowie State University, Florida Agricultural & Mechanical University, Hunter College (City
University of New York), Howard University, Spelman College, University of Illinois, Chicago, University of Maryland Eastern
Shore, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, and University of New Mexico.
14 U.S. Department of Education, White House Initiative on Advancing Educational Equity, Excellence, and Economic
Opportunity through Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from
https://sites.ed.gov/whhbcu/
7
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
HBCU Competitiveness Strategy Framework Plan outlining specific actions to drive HBCU
initiatives, covering two years (2020-2022). We are in the process of developing a new HBCU
Competitiveness Strategy Framework Plan. This Plan includes some of the actions in the
original plan, as well as new ones to drive HBCU initiatives throughout the agency. 15 Both plans
are designed to support our agency strategic planning efforts. We have rebranded our presence
with HBCUs in the Washington, Baltimore, and Virginia areas via their HandShake platform for
sharing opportunities within the Federal government. We partnered with the Department of
Education to advertise our internship opportunities in their monthly newsletter.
Beyond the activities directly related to our five focal areas for equity above, we have taken
action that will more broadly promote equity. As of October 1, 2021, we elevated the Office of
Civil Rights and Equal Opportunity (OCREO) to an independent office reporting directly to the
Office of the Commissioner. This realignment complies with the Elijah E. Cummings Federal
Employee Antidiscrimination Act of 2019. 16 OCREO oversees our Diversity, Equity, Inclusion,
and Accessibility (DEIA) program including the Diversity and Inclusion (D&I) Council and the
eight Special Emphasis Program Advisory Councils. Part of OCREO's work involves contract
services to conduct mediation on a national basis and the development of an Implicit Bias
Training curriculum. This realignment also ensures that DEIA and Equal Employment &
Opportunity matters receive the full support of agency leadership.
15 The Competitiveness Strategy identifies three HBCU goals to: share job vacancies with HBCUs, link internship opportunities
to job vacancies by providing opportunities to HBCU students and ask for grant proposals from HBCUs to support agency
research.
16 5 CFR 724.
8
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Action Plan to Identify Inequities in Our Programs and Services
Barriers to Equitable Outcome(s)
Incomplete race and ethnicity data in our records hampers our ability to determine whether our
programs are equitably serving our applicants and beneficiaries. If we can improve the
collection of race and ethnicity data, it expands our ability to conduct distributional analyses.
These analyses evaluate how applicants and beneficiaries are faring under current policies or
under potential changes. Most importantly, improved data will help us determine whether
different groups are underrepresented in our programs, provide insight into which programs are
particularly important to different communities, and examine whether there are differences in
benefit levels based on race and ethnicity. Collecting and analyzing race and ethnicity data
provides greater insight into developing potential solutions that will identify and correct
inequities in our programs and services and improve service delivery to the diverse groups of
people we serve.
From 1936 to 1987, we obtained data on race and ethnicity when people applied for a Social
Security Number (SSN) card. During this process, people could voluntarily provide us with race
and ethnicity information. In 1987, we implemented enumeration at birth (EAB), which allows
parents to request a SSN when completing forms in the hospital after their child is born.
However, hospitals do not collect data on the race and ethnicity of the child, so we have obtained
relatively little race and ethnicity data since starting this process. While most enumeration now
takes place at birth, some enumeration still occurs later in life, such as when a person seeking
lawful permanent resident status requests an SSN (i.e., automated enumeration beyond entry)
and when a person applies for a replacement SSN card. Currently, we do not collect race and
ethnicity data through these automated enumeration processes. However, if someone goes to one
of our field offices to make this request, they have the option to provide their race and ethnicity.
As a result of these developments, we have race and ethnicity data for only 59 percent of living
SSN holders.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
To address the barriers identified above, we will:
Examine and publish:
12 tables in the Annual Statistical Supplement providing data by race and
ethnicity for Social Security beneficiaries for whom we have more complete data
to determine any inequities in our programs.
Research and Statistics Note on characteristics of Social Security and SSI
beneficiaries (update of the popular 2015 Research and Statistics Note17)
Modeling in the Near Term (MINT) projection model profiles of each race and
ethnicity group in 2022, 2030, 2050, 2070 with earnings, benefit amounts,
income, poverty, health, and wealth.
17 Bailey, M.S. and Hemmeter, J., Characteristics of "Noninstitutionalized DI and SSI Program Participants, 2013 Update (2015).
Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/rsnotes/rsn2015-02.html
9
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
MINT fact sheets on disparities between racial and ethnic groups (including
benefits, income, wealth, and poverty).
Retirement and Disability Research Consortium working papers, which include a
focal area for FY 2022 on Disparities by Race and Ethnicity with 22 research
projects.
Explore options for collecting race and ethnicity data when people seek a new or
replacement SSN card online.
Determine whether we can expand our data exchange efforts to obtain and share race and
ethnicity data for research and statistical purposes within our existing legal framework.
Examine statistical methods that may allow us to improve the quality of our program's
race and ethnicity data.
Conduct ongoing distributional analyses to identify disparities in customer experience by
race, ethnicity, gender, age, and geography and collaborate with our external stakeholders
to address such disparities.
Tracking Progress and Accountability
To measure the outcomes of our proposed actions, we will:
Assess our progress with publishing research and statistics detailing the demographic
makeup of our program populations to examine inequities in our program participation,
thereby exploring changes to our policies and procedures to increase access to our
programs.
Track changes in the number of people who voluntarily provide race and ethnicity data in
office visits or online when requesting a new or replacement SSN card to evaluate the
effectiveness of our approaches to collecting this data and revising these approaches, if
necessary, to ultimately improve service delivery.
Assess whether it is possible to establish partnerships with other government agencies to
obtain and share race and ethnicity data for research and statistical purposes and, if so, to
better understand the experiences of applicants and beneficiaries with our programs.
Track our progress on employing methods to improve the quality of our program's race
and ethnicity data to evaluate whether we are serving our applicants and beneficiaries in
an equitable manner.
To hold ourselves accountable, we will:
Report our progress to Congress and the Executive Office of the President.
Resume publishing research and statistics providing race and ethnicity data so that other
institutions and stakeholders may conduct their own research to determine whether our
programs are equitable.
Measure progress in improving program data on race and ethnicity as part of performance
plans for Senior Executive Service employees with oversight for this work.
Conduct routine analysis of available race and ethnicity data within the agency and
establish comparisons to appropriate datasets and data sources available elsewhere.
10
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Action Plan to Identify and Address Systemic Barriers to Program Participation
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
Structural barriers such as labor market discrimination 18 result in higher levels of unemployment
and lower wages for African American people and Latino people at every level of education. 19
Since Social Security benefits are based on years worked and prior wages, labor market
disparities drive differences in Social Security benefits. Data prior to 2010 show that the benefit
levels for White men were considerably larger than the benefit levels for people of color and
White women, on average.
20
In addition, occupational segregation - the disproportionate representation of people of color21
and women22 in jobs that have lower pay levels and are less likely to provide benefits such as
employer-sponsored retirement plans 23 - leave people of color and women with less income and
fewer retirement resources. Social Security benefits typically make up a larger share of total
income24 for people of color and White women than White men, and there is a greater need for
SSI benefits. Further, even though the SSI program provides access to multiple assistance
programs, many recipients and their families live at or below the poverty level.
The complexity of our SSI program-driven in, part, by legislative, regulatory, and sub-
regulatory requirements- can create burdens for program applicants. This is also true for our
front-line employees who assist applicants and claimants in completing forms and review
processes. Many of our customers, particularly those from populations facing barriers cannot
conduct business with us online. Often, this is due to limited access to technology, housing
insecurity, lack of credit history, difficulty understanding the procedures to establish online
accounts, or reliance on third parties for assistance.
To better address the administrative burdens facing our applicants, we want to take actions to
ensure these applicants are receiving benefits for which they qualify. In particular, the length
18
Quilian, L., et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, The persistence of racial discrimination in hiring (2017).
Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/114/41/10870.full.pdf.
19
Kijakazi, K., et al., Urban Institute, African American Economic Security and the Role of Social Security (2019). Accessed on
February 10, 2022 from
ps://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/100697/african_american_economic_security_and_the_role_of_social_secur
ity.pdf.
20 Social Security Administration, Annual Statistical Supplement, 2010 - OASDI Current-Pay Benefits: Summary (5.A).
Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2010/5a.pdf.
21
Hamilton, D et al., Economic Policy Institute, Whiter Jobs, Higher Wages -Occupational segregation - and the lower wages of
black men (2011). Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://files.epi.org/page/-/BriefingPaper288.pdf
22
Baxter, E., American Progress, What Occupational Data Show About the Causes of the Gender Wage Gap (2015). Accessed
on February 10, 2022 from https://www.americanprogress.org/article/what-occupational-data-show-about-the-causes-of-the-
gender-wage-gap/.
23 Copeland, C., Employee Benefit Research Institute, Employment-Based Retirement Plan Participation: Geographic Differences
and Trends, 2013 (2014). Accessed on February 10, 2022 from https://www.ebri.org/publications/research-publications/issue-
briefs/content/employment-based-retirement-plan-participation-geographic-differences-and-trends-2013-5451.
24
Social Security Administration, Section 9, Importance of Social Security Relative to Total Income (2014). Accessed on
February 10, 2022 from https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/income_pop55/2014/sect09.p
11
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
and complexity of the SSI application can seem daunting for many applicants. Further,
recipients who receive SSI benefits are required to continually report their earnings to us.
Recipients can report their earnings through multiple avenues (i.e., calling or writing a local field
office, using the automated toll-free SSI Telephone Wage Reporting Service, the free SSI Mobile
Wage Reporting Smartphone app, or the my Social Security online wage reporting tool).
Many, still, may find this reporting requirement difficult.
We also understand that many applicants cannot access our online or telephone services and have
limited ability to make an appointment (e.g., due to housing insecurity or medical reasons).
They may have experienced even greater difficulty reaching us during the COVID-19 pandemic,
thereby impacting their participation in our programs. Our actuaries found that the number of
SSI applications in 2021 was about 25-30 percent lower than pre-pandemic levels in 2019.
Further, during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been providing limited in-person services to
people with appointments to address critical needs. Given the situation, this likely creates
additional barriers for some.
Action and Intended Impact on Barriers
To address the barriers identified above, we will:
Establish Agency Priority Goals (APG) for fiscal year (FY) 2022-2023 focused on equity
and improving the customer experience.
Explore development of an office that partners with Tribal Nations. This office will host
timely national consultations with Tribal government officials designed to inform our
policy and communication with Indian Tribes and Tribal officials, including natives from
Alaska; They will also ensure Native Americans can access DI and SSI benefits,
especially in remote locations.
Explore establishing a Customer Experience (CX) office that reports directly to the
Office of the Commissioner. The CX office will support and fulfill our commitments in
EO 14058, Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Delivery to Rebuild Trust in
Government.
25 The following work is already underway:
Collect feedback from our customers on their experiences with our programs and
services, identify any pain points, and explore ways to reduce the burden on
customers when applying for and participating in our programs
Continue to simplify forms by:
Clarifying questions on our SSI application for improved readability by
applicants and our front-line employees.
Exploring data exchanges to limit an applicant's need to provide the same
information to multiple Federal agencies and increase access to and equity
in government services.
Improve our service delivery by providing alternatives to in-person visits and
increasing the number of online forms (e.g., SSI). Also, developing a mobile-
25 Executive Order No. 14058, 86 FR 71357 (December 16, 2021). Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service
Delivery to Rebuild Trust in Government.
12
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
accessible, online process so that any person applying for or receiving services
from the agency can upload forms, documentation, evidence, or correspondence
associated with their transaction, whenever possible.
Maintain a public policy of technology neutrality with respect to acceptable forms
of electronic signatures, whenever possible.
Revise our regulations, forms, instructions, or other guidance to remove
requirements that applicants or beneficiaries must provide physical signatures,
whenever possible.
Support applicants and beneficiaries to identify other benefits they may be
eligible for and integrate our data and processes with those of other Federal and
State entities, whenever possible. For example, we will continue our
collaboration with the United States Department of Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Services to increase the participation of SSI applicants and recipients in
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
Continue our collaboration with the Department of Labor, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, and other Federal agencies to determine means of holding
employers accountable when they unlawfully discriminate in hiring and work practices.
Conduct research activities on our DI and SSI programs to learn about barriers applicants
and beneficiaries face and implement changes to these programs, as appropriate.
Tracking Progress and Accountability
To measure the outcomes of our proposed actions, we will:
Conduct customer feedback surveys across various journeys and touch points in our
programs to improve service delivery to our customers.
Track increases in the percentage of applicants, new recipients, and total recipients in our
DI and SSI programs to evaluate the effectiveness of changes to our policies and
practices.
Assess the effects of changes to our service delivery methods on their accessibility, use,
efficiency, security, equitable service delivery, and equitable customer experience.
To hold ourselves accountable, we will:
Report our progress to the Executive Office of the President.
Embed a metric in performance plans for Senior Executive Service employees with
oversight of this work for both equitable service delivery and customer experience.
Continue engagement with our executive branch partners, external stakeholders, the
public, and Congress (as appropriate) to increase access to information about our
programs and program participation by people from underserved communities.
13
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Action Plan to Ensure Equitable Service for Unrepresented Claimants in the Disability
Application Process
Barriers to Equitable Outcomes
The DI and SSI programs provide benefits to claimants who cannot work because they have a
medical condition that is expected to last at least one year or result in death. In determining
whether a claimant is eligible for disability benefits, we (i.e., Disability Examiners at the State
Disability Determination Service offices, administrative law judges, and administrative appeals
judges) rely on medical evidence, work history information, and testimony from the claimant and
any other relevant sources (e.g., a third-party, medical expert, or vocational expert).
While claimants can choose to appoint an attorney or non-attorney representative at any point in
the disability application process, many do not. For example, some claimants may be reluctant
to pay a portion of their awarded back benefits to a representative, they may not understand how
a representative could assist them in the application process, or they may not have access to free
or
low-cost legal services, to name a few. 26 However, research shows that having
a
representative during the disability appeals process increases the possibility of being awarded
benefits. For instance, a Government Accountability Office report found that claimants who had
a representative at the hearing level were granted disability benefits at a rate nearly three times as
high as applicants who did not have a representative.27 Representatives can obtain the necessary
evidence (e.g., claimant's medical records or work history information). They can also request
that we assist in the development of medical evidence. We do this by sending the claimant to an
examination with one of our medical experts. This ensures that the claimant's file is as complete
as possible.
Despite our efforts to inform claimants about their right to representation after their application
has been denied at the initial, reconsideration, or hearing level, our data show that in 2020, 34
percent of claimants were unrepresented at the reconsideration level and 23 percent of claimants
were unrepresented at the hearing level.² 28 A closer look at the data at the hearing level shows
that in 2020, nearly 62.5 percent of dismissals were for cases where the claimant did not have a
representative. We note that our data did not capture the specific reasons these cases were
dismissed at the hearing level.
26 Abt Associates, Claimant Representative Demonstration Technical Experts Panel Meeting Final Report (2019). Accessed on
February 10, 2022 from
https://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/documents/Claimant_Representative_Demo_TEP_report_508a%20final_Final.pdf.
27 U.S. Government Accountability Office, GAO-18-37. Additional Measures and Evaluation Needed to Enhance Accuracy and
Consistency of Hearings Decisions (2017).
28
SSA's Representative Rates by Adjudicative Level FY 2011 - FY 2020. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from
https://www.ssa.gov/foia/resources/proactivedisclosure/2020/Representative%20Rates%20by%20Adjudicative%20Level%20FY
%202011%20-%20FY%202020.docx.
14
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
We are also concerned that while evidence indicates that African American people are more
likely to have a disability29, they are less likely to be approved for disability benefits than White
people. 30 It is unclear whether a lack of representation is a contributing factor. We are
committed to evaluating and improving our internal processes to increase equitable service to
unrepresented claimants in the disability application process.
Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
To address the barriers identified above, we will:
Evaluate the impact of internal processes on outcomes for unrepresented claimants in the
disability application process by:
Analyzing existing program data and external data to identify and examine
sources of any potential bias in the disability application process as well as factors
that might play a role in access to representation or might cause disparities in the
rate of allowances for applicants (e.g., by race, ethnicity, age, or medical
condition).
Inviting proposals through our research programs to test new strategies to assist
people in underserved communities in applying for or appealing their decisions on
claims for DI and SSI benefits.
Conducting more targeted denial reviews to identify incorrect denials at the
reconsideration level.
Developing a research study to identify and address potential bias within the
Quick Disability Determination process. 31
Conducting mandatory training on unconscious bias for all agency employees,
including employees who make decisions on eligibility for DI and SSI disability
benefits. The intent of this training is to disrupt and correct any negative biases
that might interfere with the decision-making process.
Evaluating whether the current maximum fee of $6,000 that representatives
receive under the fee agreement process is enough.
Work with the National Organization of Social Security Claimants' Representatives, a
specialized bar association for attorneys and advocates, and the National Association of
Disability Representatives, a professional organization of Social Security claimants'
representatives, to increase representation for DI and SSI claimants. This is especially
the case for SSI claimants as they tend to have lower levels of representation.
Continue to reach out to unrepresented claimants to prepare them for the hearing process
and explain their right to representation.
29 Goodman, N et.al., National Disability Institute, Financial Inequality: Disability, Race, and Poverty in America. Accessed on
February 10, 2022 from https://www.nationaldisabilityinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/disability-race-poverty-in-
america.pdf.
30
U.S. Government Accountability Office, GAO/HRD-92-56, Social Security: Racial Difference in Disability Decisions
Warrants Further Investigation (1992).
31 Quick Disability Determination cases are initial cases that are electronically identified as having a high potential that the
claimant is disabled, evidence of the claimant's allegations can be easily and quickly obtained, and the case can be processed
quickly in the Disability Determination Services (DDS).
15
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Explore collaborations with pro-bono and low-cost legal service groups near our field
offices and hearing offices to increase representation at earlier stages in the disability
application process.
Tracking Progress and Accountability
To measure the outcomes of our proposed actions, we will:
Track the percentage of claimants obtaining representation at all levels of the disability
process and outcomes on their claims to evaluate and revise our internal processes, as
appropriate, and ultimately, to increase access to representation and equity in program
participation
Evaluate the sufficiency of the maximum fee that representatives receive under the fee
agreement process to incentivize representation of more disability program applicants.
Increase the percentage of represented claimants at all levels of the disability application
process.
To hold ourselves accountable, we will:
Report our progress to the Executive Office of the President.
Continue engagement with our executive branch partners, external stakeholders, and
Congress (as appropriate) on increasing representation of DI and SSI applicants.
16
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Action Plan to Increase Gender Equity and Equality in Our Programs
Barriers to Equitable Outcomes
Currently, to process applications for an original Social Security Number (SSN) card, our
systems require an applicant to identify their sex using one of the two binary sex markers (M or
F). While the face of a SSN card does not include an applicant's sex information, our systems do
collect this information. Our current process allows people to update their sex designation
information if they provide evidence such as a passport, state-issued amended birth certificate,
court order, or medical certification.32 We recognize that our current policy and systems' design
pose administrative burdens for gender-diverse and transgender people. To ensure equitable
service to gender-diverse and transgender people, we are exploring policy and systems changes,
including self-attestation without evidence for the SSN card application process.
Although there has been some movement towards streamlining administrative processes to
update information on identity documents at the Federal and State level, we understand that
transgender people still experience difficulties in obtaining accurate records, which may lead to
harassment, refusal of service, loss of employment, and other complications in their lives.
According to a 2016 report, only 11 percent of respondents reported that all their identity
documents had the name and gender they preferred, while 68 percent reported that none of their
identity documents had the name and gender they preferred. 33 At the time this survey was
conducted, only 59 percent of respondents had updated their Social Security record. More recent
data shows there are an estimated 1.4 million people who self-identify as transgender in the
United States. 34 Further, there are 15 States who now allow for X gender markers on birth
certificates and 21 States allow X gender markers on driver's licenses.35
In addition to the barriers faced by transgender people, we cannot process applications for
original SSN cards, including cards issued automatically via the enumeration at birth (EAB)
process, if an applicant provides a non-binary sex marker (e.g., X). Instead, the applicant (or
parent or guardian) must apply for an original SSN card in our field office. From May 2021 to
November 2021, 401 applications for an SSN card for children could not be processed through
EAB because of a non-binary sex marker on the supporting birth certificate. However, we
continue to help these parents or guardians at our field offices to complete the original SSN card
process for their children.36
32 RM 10212.200, Changing Numident Data for Reasons other than Name Change. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from
http://policynet.ba.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/Inx/0110212200.
33 Movement Advancement Project, National Center for Transgender Equality, Transgender Law Center. Understanding Issues
Facing Transgender Americans. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from ittps://www.lgbtmap.org/file/understanding-issues-
facing-transgender-americans.pdf.
34
UCLA School of Law Williams Institute. How Many Adults Identify as Transgender in the United States? Accessed
on
February 10, 2022 from https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/trans-adults-united-states/
35
Movement Advancement Project. Identity Document Laws and Policies. Accessed on February 10, 2022 from
https://www.lgbtmap.org/equality-maps/identity_document_laws.
36
EM-22005, Accepting Documents with a Non-binary Sex Designation or "X" for Enumeration Requests. Accessed on
February 10, 2022 from http://policynet.ba.ssa.gov/reference.nsf/lnx/02022022010306PN
17
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Action and Intended to Impact on Barriers
To address the barriers identified above, we will:
Host listening session(s) with advocates, medical professionals, and stakeholders to learn
about improving policy, service, and access to our disability programs for people in the
LGBTQIA+ community.
Explore the development of a self-attestation policy for change of sex designation for the
SSN card application process with input from our executive branch partners and external
stakeholders.
Survey methods of collecting data on sex designation for research and statistical purposes
through the SSN card application process.
Conduct agency-wide training to inform our employees on unconscious bias that may
impact equitable service to the public, including gender-diverse and transgender people.
Publish revisions to existing policies, notices, relevant publications, and online resources
to add gender-neutral language, where appropriate.
Tracking Progress and Accountability
To measure our progress, we will:
Track the development of a self-attestation policy for the SSN card application process to
reduce administrative burdens for gender-diverse and transgender people.
Require employees' completion of agency-wide training on unconscious bias and use of
agency-wide policy aimed at reducing administrative burdens for and improving our
service delivery to gender-diverse and transgender people.
Track the publishing of revisions to notices, relevant publications, and online resources to
add gender neutral language, where appropriate, and improve service delivery to gender
diverse and transgender people.
To hold ourselves accountable, we will:
Report our progress to Congress and the Executive Office of the President.
Continue existing and appropriate equity-related performance standards in Senior
Executive Service employees' and other employees' performance plans, where
applicable, to ensure successful implementation of the actions identified above.
Conduct an annual survey of our employees to assess their understanding and
responsiveness to agency-wide guidance and trainings.
Continue engagement with our executive branch partners, external stakeholders, and
Congress (as appropriate).
18
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Action Plan to Increase Equitable Access to Our Research Grants and Procurement
Opportunities for Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Minority Serving Institutions,
and Small and Disadvantaged Businesses
Barrier to Equitable Outcomes
Our data indicates that our research grants and procurement opportunities are reaching a very
limited number of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs), and small and disadvantaged businesses. For example, from 2003 to the
present, we have awarded almost $369 million in research contracts to 10 contracting
organizations. Of these, only one is a small and disadvantaged business and was awarded a
contract of just over $1 million. During the same period, research grants have been awarded to
50 different institutions, of which, only one of the primary grantees was an HBCU and one
subgrantee was based at an MSI.
We held conversations with stakeholders to learn about potential barriers in the acquisition
process for HBCUs, MSIs and small and disadvantaged businesses. They discussed the lack of
our outreach to these institutions and the competitive advantage that current contractors and
grantees gain from their long-term relationships with us and familiarity with our processes. The
existing contractors and grantees may have also benefited financially from the lengthy
engagement with the government and other large institutions. Their financial status makes it
easier for them to outcompete other contractors and grantees that may not have the same long-
term relationships.
Since we rely on research to learn about the diverse people we serve, how they are affected by
our programs, and ways in which our programs can be improved to better serve the public, we
recognize the importance of engaging with researchers who represent the diversity of the
American public.
Action and Intended Impact on Barriers
To address the barriers identified above, we will:
Develop equity-based guidelines to increase access to and encourage participation in
grant opportunities by HBCUs and MSIs in the following ways:
Conduct outreach to learn more about barriers faced by HBCUs and MSIs and
determine what steps we can take to reduce these barriers.
Establish new and leverage existing relationships with HBCUs and MSIs and
professional organizations by consistently sharing information with them about
our upcoming grant opportunities to the extent allowed under Federal law.
Expand existing partnerships with States, private foundations, and other non-
Federal groups and organizations by including HBCUs and MSIs in our research
programs.
19
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
Draft our Requests for Applications to encourage the Retirement and Disability
Research Consortium to partner with HBCUs and MSIs when conducting their
research studies on the DI and SSI programs.
Implement leading practices to increase access to and encourage participation in
procurement by small and disadvantaged businesses in the following ways:
Conducting outreach and targeted market research to learn more about barriers
small and disadvantaged businesses face and determine what steps we can take to
reduce these barriers.
Ensuring equitable distribution to HUBZone small businesses when searching the
Amazon Business account as permissible by Federal law.
Enhancing the content of our acquisition forecast to provide more information to
small and disadvantaged businesses.
Increasing the publishing of Requests for Information to identify small and
disadvantaged businesses capable of fulfilling our procurement needs.
Prioritizing our efforts in both sole source and competitive environments to
increase our ability to exceed our fiscal year small business goals and further
assist in meeting the President's 15 percent small business goal by 2025.37
Exploring new methods to improve contracting processes in partnership with the
Small Business Administration.
Reviewing and adjusting our stewardship practices, policies, and procedures to
boost opportunities for small and disadvantaged businesses on both small and
large contracts.
Ensuring coordination among our contracting personnel, the requesting
component, the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, and the
Office of Civil Rights and Equal Opportunity.
Establish a framework and process to ensure grant recipients of Federal funds are
complying with anti-discrimination civil rights provisions, and all procurement
solicitations and awards include the appropriate terms and conditions required to
implement law or executive order applicable to the acquisition (e.g., Equal Opportunity
clause(s)).
Tracking Progress and Accountability
To measure our progress, we will:
Track the percentage of research grants and procurement opportunities that are awarded
to HBCUs, MSIs, and small and disadvantaged businesses to evaluate and improve our
outreach and engagement efforts and increase equitable access to our research grants and
procurement opportunities.
Track the number of published research studies that apply new approaches (e.g.,
community-based methodologies) to improve our understanding of the diverse
37 Office of Management and Budget, Memo-22-03 on Advancing Equity in Federal Procurement (2021). Accessed on February
10, 2022 from https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/M-22-03.pdf
20
SEC
Social Security's Equity Action Plan in Agreement with EO 13985
communities and their needs and revise our programs and policies in an equitable
manner.
To hold ourselves accountable in the following ways, we will:
Report our progress to the Executive Office of the President.
Embed a metric in performance plans for SES employees with oversight of this work.
Enforce compliance with antidiscrimination civil rights policies and law, both internal
and external to the agency.
Ensure that the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization continues to have
access to senior leadership and agency acquisition officials to increase the probability of
participation by small and disadvantaged businesses.
Obtain feedback from external stakeholders to ensure that we are conducting effective
engagement and outreach to MSIs and small and disadvantaged businesses.
Conclusion
Our programs are intended to provide or improve income security for the diverse group of people
we serve. However, systemic barriers external and internal to the agency hinder our ability to
ensure equitable access to our programs and services. We have and intend to continue to identify
the sources of these barriers, take actions to address them-sometimes in collaboration with our
executive branch partners and external stakeholders-and measure the results over time.
21
