Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018
Fiscal Year 2023
Evaluation Plan
Securing today
and tomorrow
Social Security Administration I February 2022
CONTENTS
Contents
2
Introduction
3
Evaluations and Evidence-Building Activities
4
Project 1 - Retirement and Disability Research Consortium Service Delivery Focal Area
4
Project 2 - Racial Equity: Enhancing Existing Program Data on Race and Ethnicity
5
Project 3 - Racial Equity: Disparities in Disability Programs
6
Project 4 - Customer Knowledge and Preferences
7
Project 5 - Ticket To Work Optimization
9
Project 6 - Interventional Cooperative Agreement Program
10
Project 7 - Beyond Benefits Study
11
Project 8 - Promoting Work through Early Interventions
12
Project 9 - Work Disability: Functional Assessment Battery Research Study
13
Project 10 - Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds
15
Project 11 - Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program
16
Project 12 - Pre-Effectuation Review of Disability Determinations
18
Project 13 - Targeted Denial Review
19
Project 14 - Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Stewardship Review
20
Project 15 - Supplemental Security Income Stewardship Review
21
Project 16 - Barriers Analysis
23
Selected Abbreviations
DDS
Disability Determination Services
DI
Disability Insurance
FY
Fiscal Year
OASDI
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
OASI
Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
OCACT
Office of the Chief Actuary
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
RDRC
Retirement and Disability Research Consortium
SSA
Social Security Administration
SSAB
Social Security Advisory Board
SSI
Supplemental Security Income
INTRODUCTION
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan describes our most significant evaluation and
evidence-building activities planned for FY 2023. We define significant activities as those required by
law, address the President's priorities, or support the goals in our FYs 2022-2026 Agency Strategic
Plan. We identified 16 activities for this Evaluation Plan.
In addition to this Evaluation Plan, we will continue to describe our evaluation and evidence-building
activities in three separate documents. In the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Program Technical
Materials Supporting Our Annual Budget, the section Extramural Research, Demonstrations, and
Outreach describes many of our activities. Our FY 2021 Annual Performance Report includes an
appendix titled Program Assessments that describes our ongoing studies and surveys designed to
assess our programs. The Pilot Program Metrics section of the Limitations on Administrative Expenses
section of our annual budget describes our pilot program evaluations. This FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
identifies the most significant activities from these three documents, and it includes the additional
information required by the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.
When we develop our evaluation and evidence-building activities, we consult with internal and external
stakeholders. For example, our Associate Commissioner for the Office of Research, Evaluation, and
Statistics sends out an annual memo to the Deputy Commissioners from all our major offices to obtain
information on their research and evaluation needs. Our Associate Commissioner for the Office of
Research, Demonstration, and Employment Support holds regular meetings with representatives from
all of our major offices to provide updates and obtain information on our demonstration projects. The
external stakeholders that provide us with information on our research and evaluation activities include
the Social Security Advisory Board (SSAB), the Congress, the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), and academics and practitioners who serve on the Technical Evaluation Panels we use to
develop our research and demonstration projects.
For each significant activity, we provide the information required in the Evidence Act and in the OMB
guidance described in memorandum M-19-23. More specifically, we include:
A title;
A description of the key questions to be addressed by the evaluation activity or evidence-building
activity;
The information needed for the evaluation or study;
The methods to be used;
The anticipated challenges; and
The dissemination strategy.
Social Security Administration
3
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
EVALUATIONS AND EVIDENCE-BUILDING - ACTIVITIES
Project 1 - Retirement and Disability Research Consortium Service
Delivery Focal Area
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
Our Service Delivery Focal Area for the Retirement and Disability Research Consortium (RDRC)
identifies our interest in studies that help us identify and implement advancements in how we
deliver quality, accurate, equitable, and timely service to our customers. Possible evaluation
questions include:
1. How do the various modes of Social Security service delivery affect customer satisfaction? Do
they affect different socio-economic groups differently?
2. How would simplifying administrative rules and requirements affect the Social Security
Administration's (SSA) ability to offer accurate, efficient, equitable, and appropriate services to
the public and the ability of program participants to make decisions in their best interest?
3. What is the impact of the numerous financial exploitation schemes that target Social Security
beneficiaries, and what approaches could be considered to prevent or halt them?
4. Examine how other countries handle their Social Security claiming/service provision. In other
words, what is their service model (field offices, websites, home visits, staffing, etc.)?
5. How do other countries address improper payments, including any tolerances or minimum
thresholds used, methods used for identifying improper payments, and steps to correct them?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: The RDRC is an interdisciplinary extramural research
program that we fund through cooperative agreements with centers at Boston College, University of
Michigan, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The RDRC has three main goals:
1. Research and evaluate a wide array of topics related to Social Security's Old-Age, Survivors, and
Disability Insurance (OASDI) and SSI programs and related federal policies;
2. Disseminate information on these topics to policymakers, researchers, stakeholder organizations,
and the public; and
3. Provide training and education to scholars and practitioners in research areas relevant to these
topics.
All RDRC research and activities must be relevant to one of SSA's program areas or populations. We
emphasize to the centers that we would like them to consider equity in all their research. In addition,
each year we provide the centers with research focal areas. In addition to the focal area on service
delivery, we included a focal area on "Disparities by Race and Ethnicity" in FY 2022 and we expect to
include a focal area on equity in FY 2023. The current agreements run from FY2019 through FY2023.
The centers' websites include completed research and other information.
Information Needed for the Study: The RDRC centers identify the information that they need for their
proposed evaluation or study in their grant proposal. As part of our technical review of each grant
proposal, we assess whether the proposed information necessary for the evaluation or study is
available and is appropriate for the proposed evaluation.
Social Security Administration
4
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Methods: We encourage research employing a variety of approaches (e.g., descriptive and causal
studies, simulations), utilizing innovative methods, and drawing from new data sources (e.g.,
Occupational Requirements Survey data, data collected for demonstration projects).
Anticipated Challenges: The "improving service delivery" focal area is relatively new to the RDRC,
and it might take RDRC researchers time to establish a research agenda on the new focal area. In
addition, research on this topic often requires using SSA administrative data, which external
researchers are typically unable to access. In the past, SSA researchers have collaborated with RDRC
researchers to get around these data access issues and conduct studies on new priority areas. The
collaboration has been successful in that it combines the program and data expertise from our research
staff with the methods expertise from the RDRC research team. Although this collaboration model may
be a way to promote service delivery research among the RDRC researchers, heavy workloads, and a
declining number of possible SSA researchers may make it difficult to identify collaborators.
Dissemination: One of the RDRC centers' main goals is to disseminate information on their research
to policymakers, researchers, stakeholder organizations, and the public. The RDRC holds an annual
meeting where researchers share findings with key stakeholders and receive feedback on their
research. Each RDRC center has a website that contains policy briefs, working papers, and other
information on their research. The RDRC centers publish their findings in professional journals and
other outlets. We will use the RDRC research on the service delivery focal area to inform our efforts to
deliver quality, accurate, equitable, and timely service to our customers.
Project 2 - Racial Equity: Enhancing Existing Program Data on Race and
Ethnicity
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
To what extent can we effectively enhance existing program data on race and ethnicity through
statistical techniques to be more reliable and higher quality?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: On January 20, 2021, the President signed Executive
Order 13985 officially titled Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities. The
Executive Order directs agencies to examine barriers and disparities by race and ethnicity in their
programs and to begin taking actions to eliminate them. However, it also recognizes: (1) that many
Federal datasets are not disaggregated by race, ethnicity, gender, disability, income, veteran status, or
other key demographic variables, (2) that this lack of data has cascading effects and impedes efforts to
measure and advance equity, and (3) gathering the data needed to advance equity is a necessary first
step. We have initiated an agency-wide effort to enhance our existing program data on race and
ethnicity that is necessary to examine where disparities and barriers exist in our programs and services.
This information will be critical in our efforts to remove those barriers.
Currently, we are working to improve our existing race and ethnicity data. This work is part of our
Equity Action Plan, and it includes developing metrics for assessing the reliability and quality of that
data, as well as using statistical methods for imputing race and ethnicity where needed.
In FY 2022, we expect to begin developing techniques for enhancing the program data and metrics to
measure the reliability and quality of that data.
In FY 2023, we expect to use the enhanced data (either improved survey-matched, or statistically
enhanced program data, or both) to quantify disparities and barriers and to expand publication of
statistics and research that uses the program data on race and ethnicity. This work is part of a broader
Social Security Administration
5
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
effort described in our Equity Action Plan to improve the collection of race and ethnicity data. In
addition to our efforts to enhance existing data, we plan to explore options for collecting race and
ethnicity data when people seek a new or replacement SSN card online, and we will determine whether
we can expand our data exchange efforts to obtain and share race and ethnicity data for research and
statistical purposes within our existing legal framework.
Information Needed for the Study: We will use survey data and program data, including Census
Bureau surveys and program data on disability applicants. We will also use research on statistical
methods, algorithms, and techniques to impute race and ethnicity.
Methods: We will identify metrics for determining the reliability and quality of race and ethnicity data
based on the rate of missing values, conflicting values, and categories lost due to lack of data or
sample size. We will use appropriate imputation procedures for addressing the completeness and
quality of race and ethnicity data in our program data, including using personal characteristics and
geographical area from surveys. We will compare imputations of race and ethnicity to the self-reported
race and ethnicity in a pre-selected validation sample to assess the imputation method. Another
validation approach may include conducting a survey of those where we impute race and ethnicity, and
to compare their self-reported race and ethnicity to the imputation.ยน
Anticipated Challenges: To varying extents, SSA program data on race and ethnicity are missing for
relevant program populations (e.g., applicants, beneficiaries, Federal Insurance Contributions Act -
covered workers), especially for younger populations. Matching race and ethnicity data from surveys
(e.g., Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), Current Population Survey (CPS), Health
and Retirement Study) to SSA program data may fill in some of these gaps; however, these surveys
have relatively small sample sizes that limit their utility for certain program populations. We hope that
work on enhancing race and ethnicity data in SSA program data and adding the American Community
Survey (ACS) data linked to SSA program data might help resolve some of these challenges.
Dissemination: We will publish our research on our Research, Statistics & Policy Analysis public-
facing website.
Project 3 - Racial Equity: Disparities in Disability Programs
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
What disparities and barriers to benefits exist under current SSA disability programs by race,
ethnicity, sex, and other communities facing barriers?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: On January 20, 2021, the President signed Executive
Order 13985 officially titled Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities. The
Executive Order directs agencies to examine barriers and disparities by race and ethnicity in their
programs and to begin taking actions to eliminate them. We began an agency-wide effort to examine
where disparities and barriers exist in our programs and services, and this effort is an important
component of our Equity Action Plan. This information will be critical in efforts to remove those barriers.
In FY 2021, we began publishing statistics by race and ethnicity on disability beneficiaries using the
CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement data. We started exploring how to analyze our disability
program data and surveys for disparities by race and ethnicity in three phases of disability: the decision
1 Baumeister, L., K. Marchi, M. Pearl, R. Williams, and P. Braveman. 2000. The validity of information on "race" and
"Hispanic ethnicity" in California birth certificate data. Health Services Research 35(4):869-883.
Social Security Administration
6
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
to apply for benefits, the award or denial decision, and post-entitlement actions such as continuing
disability reviews.
In FY 2022, we expect to produce preliminary analyses on race and ethnicity disparities in the disability
programs. These analyses may only provide breakouts of each race and ethnicity group by sex and
age, depending on the data source. We expect to work on how to add further breakouts or controls for
factors such as impairment, lifetime earnings, geography, and other characteristics to estimate more
precisely disparities and barriers by race and ethnicity.
In FY 2023, we expect to produce more precise estimates of disparities by race and ethnicity in the
disability programs. We expect to have enhanced data (either improved survey-matched data, or
statistically enhanced program data, or both) to develop these more precise estimates, with disparities
isolated at each step from application through to post-entitlement actions. If work proceeds quickly, we
would like to document any disparities and barriers over time to gauge if they are changing and why.
Information Needed for the Study: We need Census Bureau surveys (SIPP, CPS, and ACS), other
survey data, and our own program data on applicants and beneficiaries. We need to ensure we have
legal authority to use the data for research and statistics purposes, and to exchange it with Federal
partners and other stakeholders to increase our capacity to use the data.
Methods: We plan to use standard statistical methods for quantifying disparities and barriers by race
and ethnicity, and metrics to determine whether disparities have changed over time. We also plan to
conduct qualitative research with our program beneficiaries to shed light on barriers we are not aware
of, deepen understanding of those we do, and to answer questions that quantitative analysis cannot
address.
Anticipated Challenges: Disability program data has a unique set of challenges when it comes to
research and statistics because of missing data on some characteristics, in addition to missing data on
race and ethnicity status. We hope that work on enhancing the program data on race and ethnicity,
ongoing efforts to produce analytical disability program data, and adding the much larger American
Community Survey data linked to our program data might help resolve those challenges by FY 2023.
Dissemination: We will publish our research on our Research, Statistics & Policy Analysis public
facing website.
Project 4 - Customer Knowledge and Preferences
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
How effective are our efforts to improve public knowledge of our programs and to meet the public's
preferences for how they want to engage with us?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: We have made a concerted effort to understand our
customers, inform and assist them in navigating our programs, and adjust to their preferences for
delivering services. The redesign of the Social Security Statement and the expansion of services
available in my Social Security are all a part of this larger agenda, as well as the inclusion of a priority
question related to this effort in our FYs 2022 - 2026 Learning Agenda.
We support surveys on program knowledge and customers' preferences for communications with us
through the Understanding America Study (UAS). The main SSA surveys in the UAS include the 1)
Social Security Retirement Program Knowledge survey, 2) Social Security Channels Preferences
Social Security Administration
7
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
survey, and 3) Social Security Disability Program Knowledge survey. The Social Security Retirement
Program Knowledge survey (also referred to as "What do People Know about Social Security") asks
respondents questions that assess their knowledge of the Social Security retirement program and
retirement planning more generally. The Social Security Channels Preferences survey asks
respondents how they receive and/or would prefer to receive information on retirement planning from
Social Security and other sources, including use of our online services. The Social Security Disability
Program Knowledge survey, which was initially fielded in FY 2021, asks respondents about their views
and knowledge of the Social Security disability program (and for those who ever applied for benefits,
the survey asks about experiences with the program).
UAS surveys are fielded on a regular basis following a rolling two-year cycle for the three surveys
(retirement knowledge, channels preferences, and disability knowledge). The surveys help us track
changes in program knowledge and communication preferences as respondents grow older and as we
implement improvements to online services and communications. We will field the fourth Social
Security Retirement Program Knowledge survey and the fourth Social Security Channels Preferences
survey in FY 2022. We will field the second Disability Program Knowledge survey in FY 2023.
With over 400 surveys completed on an internet panel that is approaching 10,000 respondents, the
UAS allows us to study the public from several different angles. Surveys on health, retirement,
employment, cognitive abilities, personality, financial literacy, consumer behavior, and other salient
factors can be matched to a wealth of information about how people engage with our programs.
In FY 2023, there will be an extensive set of responses, some longitudinal, on the Social Security
questions that will be available for study. The respondents' personal characteristics from several other
surveys will allow us to study differences in the Social Security findings from several different facets
typically unavailable to other agency instruments.
Below are some examples of our papers using UAS.
Alattar, Laith, Matt Messel, and David Rogofsky. 2018. "An Introduction to the Understanding
America Study Internet Panel," Social Security Bulletin, 78(2):13-28.
Rogofsky, David, Richard E. Chard, and Joanne Yoong. 2018. "Insight into the Earned Income
Tax Credit and Tax-Advantaged Retirement Savings," Social Security Bulletin, 78(2):1-11.
Alattar, Laith, Matt Messel, David Rogofsky, and Mark A. Sarney. 2019. "The Use of
Longitudinal Data on Social Security Program Knowledge," Social Security Bulletin, 79(4):1-9.
Information Needed for the Study: We will use the UAS survey responses in the "comprehensive
file" that matches respondents across several UAS surveys. UAS data is publicly available.
Methods: We will analyze results from UAS surveys on Social Security knowledge and communication
preferences by race and ethnicity, with additional analysis of the economic, educational, health, and
other characteristics of each race and ethnicity group. We expect to present both descriptive statistics
as well as multivariate statistical analyses, including regressions, with careful attention to choosing
appropriate controls.
Anticipated Challenges: We expect the sample size to continue growing to 10,000 but it may be
slower than anticipated. Some of the smaller race and ethnicity categories may need to be aggregated
into an 'other' category if their sample size is too small for questions asked of subsets of the population,
like people who have read the Statement.
Dissemination: We will publish our research on our Research, Statistics & Policy Analysis public-
facing website.
Social Security Administration
8
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Project 5 - -Ticket To Work Optimization
EVALUATION QUESTION
What is the impact of improved communications with disability beneficiaries who are eligible to
participate in the Ticket to Work (TTW) program on program participation?
Context for the Evaluation Question: The Ticket to Work (TTW) program provides Social Security
Disability Insurance (DI) beneficiaries and SSI recipients with access to employment-related services
from agency-approved service providers and vocational rehabilitation agencies. We reimburse
approved service providers and vocational rehabilitation agencies when their TTW clients meet
specified employment-related outcomes. For DI beneficiaries and SSI recipients, the TTW program is a
free and voluntary program that can help individuals obtain and maintain employment, if that is their
desire, as well as participate in job training and workforce development opportunities.
Prior to June 2011, we sent a "good news letter" plus a hard cardstock "Ticket" as part of our TTW
outreach efforts to all newly awarded SSI recipients and DI beneficiaries with disabilities (with only
minor exceptions). We suspended these TTW mailings abruptly in June 2011 and we did not restart
them until March 2015 as an administrative cost savings measure. Using a regression-discontinuity
research design, we found that stopping the mailer nearly halved TTW participation, dropping it from
about 2.6 percent to 1.4 percent of Ticket-eligible beneficiaries and recipients when the mailers ceased.
This evidence indicates that there is significant potential for TTW outreach materials, including the
content and timing of TTW outreach materials, to increase TTW participation.
The TTW Notice Optimization project will develop an evidence-based approach to targeting outreach to
beneficiaries who are eligible to participate in the TTW program. The project seeks to increase
participation in the TTW program; in it, we test changes to Ticket notices, including the types of notices
we send, the language we use, and the timing of our notices. We worked closely with the General
Service Administration (GSA), Office of Evaluation Sciences to develop the outreach and evaluation
plans.
The primary outcome of interest is Ticket assignment defined as signing up with a Ticket to Work
service provider (Employment Network, Workforce Employment Network or Vocational Rehabilitation
Agency) to develop a work plan and receive job support services to achieve that plan. The secondary
outcomes of interest is employment above the substantial gainful activity level and Ticket payments.
Information Needed for the Study: The information needed for the study comes from the data we
use to administer our programs, including data on individuals who are sent TTW information, who
assign Tickets, and who call the TTW Helpline. We store these data in the Disability Control File, the
internet Ticket Operations Provider Support System, and contractor records.
Methods: The TTW Optimization project uses a randomized controlled trial design that incorporates
three separate tests-an initial notice test, a one-year notice test, and a two-year notice test. We use
random assignment to allocate study participants into a treatment group that will receive the new TTW
outreach materials or into a control arm. The current selection criteria exclude beneficiaries over age
62 and those with diaries with medical conditions that are not expected to improve (except blind and
deaf individuals). For each individual, we observe Ticket assignments at nine months after we send the
respective notice (i.e., nine months post-intervention).
Anticipated Challenges: The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a major disruption in the labor market.
This will likely affect the results from our evaluation. We are implementing the project as planned, but
we will need to consider and document the labor market environment as a factor potentially affecting
Social Security Administration
9
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
our results. We extended the project for an additional nine months (for a total of 18 months of mailings)
to increase the likelihood of identifying the impact of the mailings in a post-pandemic environment. We
may also consider whether we can use geographic variation in the response to COVID-19 as a means
to identify how COVID-19 affects our findings.
Dissemination: GSA will publish an abstract on their website at the conclusion of the study. GSA will
also write a paper about the project for publication in an academic journal. Additionally, we will use the
results to improve Ticket outreach and share the findings with TTW stakeholders as appropriate.
Project 6 - Interventional Cooperative Agreement Program
EVALUATION QUESTION
What are the impacts of interventional programs initiated in collaboration with states, private
foundations, and other entities on the labor market, program participation, and economic
outcomes of DI beneficiaries or SSI recipients?
Context for the Evaluation Question: In May 2021, we announced the Interventional Cooperative
Agreement Program (ICAP). In FY 2021, we plan to award three cooperative agreements. The
cooperative agreements have a five-year project period with a base year and the four years for
implementation and evaluation activities. In FY 2022, we will conduct startup activities with the initial
awardees, including finalizing data agreements between the awardees and SSA, as well as receiving
approval from OMB for their data collection packages. The projects will then proceed with
implementation and evaluation plans for the remaining project period.
The purpose of this new program is to allow us to enter into cooperative agreements to collaborate with
States, private foundations, and other non-Federal groups and organizations who have the interest and
ability to identify, operate, and partially fund interventional research, including interventions targeting or
otherwise including underserved populations.
ICAP will provide a process through which we can systematically review proposals from outside
organizations (including States, private foundations, and other non-Federal groups and organizations)
and enter into cooperative agreements with them for collaboration on interventional research. We plan
to solicit new projects on a recurring basis (e.g., we plan to solicit and award three additional
cooperative agreements in FY 2022). We hope to tap local, external knowledge about potential
interventions relevant to beneficiaries who receive Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) benefits or
SSI.
ICAP research topics are as follows:
Examining the structural barriers in the labor market, including for racial, ethnic, or other
underserved communities, including people with disabilities, that increase the likelihood of people
receiving or applying for SSDI or SSI benefits;
Promoting self-sufficiency by helping people enter, stay in, or return to the labor force, including
children and youth;
Coordinating planning between private and human services agencies to improve the administration
and effectiveness of the DI, SSI, and related programs;
Assisting claimants in underserved communities apply for or appeal determinations or decisions on
claims for DI and SSI benefits; and
Social Security Administration
10
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Conducting outreach to children with disabilities who are potentially eligible to receive SSI, and
conducting outreach to their parents and guardians.
Information Needed for the Study: The information collected will depend on the individual grant
awardees project needs. We will finalize data sharing agreements and data collection instruments, as
needed, during the first year of the project.
Methods: The grant awardees will recommend specific research and evaluation methods. To improve
participation of marginalized groups, ICAP will encourage applicants to include people of color, people
from underserved communities, and people with lived experiences, as appropriate.
Anticipated Challenges: We may face challenges finalizing data agreements, which may cause
delays with starting activities for some grantees.
Dissemination: We will post all reports from the projects on our public-facing website and provide
information to committees and workgroups. We are developing a broader dissemination plan.
Project 7 - Beyond Benefits Study
EVALUATION QUESTION
What services and supports help people exiting the DI or SSI programs maintain or achieve self-
sufficiency without a need to return to receiving DI or SSI benefits?
Context for the Evaluation Question: Based on medical improvement, we terminate the benefits of
thousands of DI beneficiaries and SSI recipients each year. However, many individuals whose benefits
are terminated later return to the disability rolls. About 30 percent of adult SSI-only recipients and 20
percent of DI-only beneficiaries who stop receiving benefits because of medical improvement return to
these programs within eight years. Among the DI beneficiaries whose benefits stop, few maintain
employment or work above common thresholds of self-sufficiency.
In FY 2019, we conducted a Technical Expert Panel (TEP) to discuss options for a demonstration to
support individuals exiting DI due to medical improvement. The TEP recommended we study the
services this population needs to support continued or improved self-sufficiency.
We initiated the study based on the TEP's recommendation. We will gather evidence through surveys
and focus groups. We will also use motivational interviewing to identify the duration and intensity of
supports that are necessary for an intervention. The information gathered during the interviews will
provide additional context on the needs of this population and how to motivate individuals who have
been removed from the program to remain employed and self-sufficient.
In FY 2021, we awarded a contract to conduct a study of the types of services and supports that
individuals exiting the DI or SSI programs need to maintain or achieve self-sufficiency.
In FY 2022, we will clear all data collection activities, per the Paperwork Reduction Act, and begin
quantitative data collection and motivational interviewing pilot activities. We will set up interviewing
activities and finalize the schedule with the contractor. We expect to complete all activities by the end
of FY 2023 and receive a final report by FY 2024.
Information Needed for the Study: We will gather information needed on the barriers to employment
and other needs of this population using surveys, focus groups, and motivational interviewing. We will
use SSA program data to construct the sampling frame and update data used in final analyses about
Social Security Administration
11
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
the benefit status of participants. Final analyses will include scrutiny of SSA program data to provide
summary work histories and earnings summaries. How administrative data will bear on research
questions and what kind of analyses will be pursued will become more defined after the contract is
awarded.
Methods: We will conduct a small, non-random pilot of motivational interviewing to accomplish two
goals. First, it will provide a sense of the duration and intensity of supports that are necessary for such
an intervention. Second, it will assist data-gathering efforts by providing additional context to the needs
of this population. We will also use appropriate statistical methods to summarize results from surveys,
and we will develop and follow protocols for conducting focus group interviews.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate any significant challenges with this project.
Dissemination: We will post all reports from the project on our public-facing website. We will provide
information to external stakeholders, including the SSAB, the Congress, and other interested
stakeholders. We are developing a broader dissemination plan.
Project 8 - Promoting Work through Early Interventions
EVALUATION QUESTION
Are early intervention programs successful at improving labor force participation and reducing the
need for SSI program assistance for the populations targeted by each program?
Context for the Evaluation Question: The Promoting Work through Early Interventions Project
(PWEIP) is a joint undertaking of SSA and the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) within the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
The project will identify, select, and evaluate programs likely to improve the employment and economic
outcomes of individuals who have not yet applied for SSI and have little or no work history, current or
foreseeable disabilities, but who do have ties to U.S. safety net programs (e.g., receiving Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families or Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program benefits). Evaluations
of programs include impact assessments and implementation research. A select number of evaluations
will also include a cost analysis.
In FY 2019, we developed and entered a jointly financed cooperative arrangement with ACF and
transferred $25 million to support the evaluation and/or service provisions of selected intervention
programs. In FY 2020, we worked with ACF to identify and select programs to participate in an
evaluation under ACF's Building Evidence on Employment Strategies (BEES) and Next Generation of
Enhanced Employment Strategies (NextGen) projects. As of December 2021, we have selected six
BEES programs and five NextGen programs.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, ACF anticipates PWEIP contract activities will conclude in 2026
rather than 2023. By the conclusion of the PWEIP in 2026, we aim to generate findings that will inform
both agencies and contribute meaningfully to the broader field of disability and self-sufficiency research.
Information Needed for the Study: We are collecting data at each project monitoring outcomes of the
participants. We will provide ACF with de-identified individual-level disability data, analyze earnings
data, and generate summary statistics about participants of SSA-funded programs. These data
activities began in Fall 2021.
Social Security Administration
12
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Methods: We will support rigorous evaluation of existing employment support and training programs
informed by evidence and shown to be promising for the population of interest. *The selected BEES
and NextGen projects target a variety of populations who may be at-risk of receiving SSI, including
individuals with mental health impairments, substance use disorders, recipients of Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, and justice-involved
individuals. Interventions will provide employment, training, and mental health services, including
testing the Individualized Placement and Support (IPS) model in multiple settings. The evaluation will
randomly assign participants of BEES/NextGen programs to a treatment or to a control group. The
control group will receive the services and interventions normally offered by a given program. The
treatment group will receive services offered as a part of early intervention(s) and work model(s) tested
under a specific PWEIP program. Evaluations of each program will include impact evaluation and
implementation research. A select number of evaluations will also include cost analysis. ACF
contractors will conduct baseline, interim, and final surveys of participants at the time of enrollment, 12
months later, and at the conclusion of the testing period, respectively. ACF will implement the PWEIP
across various states and regions.
All the PWEIP projects are serving people facing barriers.
Anticipated Challenges: Recruitment and enrollment has been a challenge for some of the PWEIP
projects because of COVID-19. Some programs have extended the enrollment period and others have
made progress in enrollment, but it remains below expectations. We expect these challenges to
continue and are planning to meet with ACF to discuss potential options. We will continue to monitor
and document such challenges during the project.
Dissemination: We will post all reports from the project on our public-facing website. We will provide
information to external stakeholders, including the SSAB, the Congress, and other interested
stakeholders. We will work with our Office of Communications to formalize a broader dissemination
plan.
Project 9 - Work Disability: Functional Assessment Battery Research
Study
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
To what extent does the Work Disability Functional Assessment Battery (WD-FAB) improve our
ability to identify who to select for a continuing disability review (CDR) full medical review?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: The WD-FAB is a self-reported assessment of whole
person function developed through a collaborative effort among SSA, the National Institutes of Health
(NIH), and Boston University. The WD-FAB uses Item Response Theory and Computer Adaptive
Testing to select the most relevant set of questions from an item bank covering eight components of
function in the domains of Physical Function and Mental Health Function. We completed a prototype in
2016 and version 3.1 of the tool in 2019.
Through the WD-FAB study, we will test the use of the instrument in our medical CDR process. The
primary objectives of the pilot study are to assess feasibility of integrating the WD-FAB into the CDR
business process, examine relationships between single administrations of the WD-FAB and the CDR
process, and explore relationships between a change in WD-FAB data and the CDR process. More
specifically, we will compare WD-FAB data to CDR predictive model scores, responses to the CDR
Mailer (Form SSA-455) questions, and CDR full medical review outcomes for participating
Social Security Administration
13
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
beneficiaries. Since this is the first time we will administer the WD-FAB in the beneficiary population,
the pilot study includes a secondary aim to understand how beneficiaries endorse symptoms related to
whole person function.
Information Needed for the Study: We will collect beneficiaries' responses to the WD-FAB to
determine their correspondence with existing SSA medical CDR measures. In September 2020, we
awarded a contract to gather the necessary data for the study. The contractor will initiate the first wave
of data collection in Fall 2021 and the second wave of data collection in Spring 2022. We should
complete data collection by August 2022.
Methods: This pilot study is a descriptive, longitudinal study of a targeted sample of DI and SSI
beneficiaries that will assess change in function by administering the WD-FAB to the same
beneficiaries at two time points roughly 6 months apart. Information obtained during this evaluation of
the WD-FAB in our CDR process will give us an initial evidence base to evaluate if the instrument can
add value and supplement SSA's existing CDR business process activities (e.g., CDR predictive model,
CDR Mailer - Form SSA-455, etc.) in identifying which beneficiaries should be selected for a CDR full
medical review.
We will select a stratified random sample from cases with medical CDR diaries that have come due in
quarter 1 of FY 2022 (i.e., October 1, 2021-December 31, 2021) to identify the participant pool for the
study. We will stratify the participant pool by predictive model score, diary type, and age. The
contractor will then recruit study participants from the participant pool of 5,334 adult beneficiaries that
we identify for them.
We implemented procedures to obtain adequate response rates from beneficiaries who need to opt-in
to participate in the study. Working with the NIH, we developed a power analysis to identify the
appropriate number of beneficiaries to include in our participant pool to help address this challenge and
ensure an adequate response from beneficiaries.
To assess whether the WD-FAB improves our ability to identify who to select for a medical CDR, we will
use linear regression models with the predictive model scores or responses to the CDR Mailer as the
response variable and WD-FAB data as the predictor variables. The regression coefficients and their
p-values will be used for exploratory analysis regarding the correlation between WD-FAB and predictive
model scores or responses to CDR mailers. In addition, a linear regression will be fit using CDR full
medical review decisions as the outcome measure and the changes in the WD-FAB data and the
baseline WD-FAB scores as the predictor variables to provide preliminary results on how the WD-FAB
score changes relate to initial CDR full medical review decisions.
Anticipated Challenges: We might face challenges in obtaining final medical CDR outcomes within
the study's timeframe - FY 2022. If enough final medical CDR determinations do not take place in FY
2022, completion of the study analysis report will be delayed.
Dissemination: We expect to receive an analysis report from NIH in FY 2023, and we will disseminate
the report to internal and external stakeholders. We will post the report on our public-facing website.
We will work with NIH and BU to disseminate the findings through conferences and other professional
outlets.
Social Security Administration
14
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Project 10 - Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-
Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
Do the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) program and the Disability Insurance (DI)
program have sufficient trust fund reserves and projected income to pay scheduled benefits over a
prospective 75-year period?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: The Social Security Act (the Act) established the
Board of Trustees to oversee the financial operations of the OASI and DI Trust Funds. The Act
requires that the Board of Trustees, among other duties, report annually to Congress on the actuarial
status and financial operations of the OASI and DI Trust Funds. This report provides a vast amount of
descriptive data and analysis on the financial status of the OASI and DI Trust Funds. It also includes
an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of the program's capacity to pay
scheduled benefits over the course of a prospective 75-year period. While the assessment includes
information on several outcomes, two key outcomes of interest to policymakers are:
1. The estimated date that each trust fund's reserves will be depleted, and
2. The estimated percentage of scheduled benefits that the program would be able to support when
the trust fund reserves are depleted.
The report includes a description of the uncertainty in the outcomes using:
1. Alternative deterministic scenarios (i.e., high-cost and low-cost scenarios);
2. A stochastic model; and
3. Sensitivity analysis on key assumptions.
Our Office of the Chief Actuary (OCACT) conducts the vast majority of the research and analysis that
support this annual report to Congress. OCACT uses the results of this annual assessment as a basis
for evaluating legislative proposals that affect the trust funds. The Office of Retirement and Disability
Policy uses the results of this assessment to develop our Modelling Income in the Near Term (MINT)
microsimulation model that we use to evaluate the distributional effects of proposed changes to the
programs. Policymakers rely on this information when considering changes to the program to improve
program solvency or for other purposes. Thus, the assessment is foundational for other important
evaluation activities that we perform on a regular basis.
The assessment described in the annual report is among the most important activities that we support
and disseminate, policymakers rely on this report to make important decisions on the future of the OASI
and DI programs.
Information Needed for the Study: The information needed for the assessment comes from a variety
of sources. OCACT works closely with representatives for each Trustee to develop the demographic,
economic, and program benefit assumptions that the Trustees use for the annual report. The
information used to develop the assumptions comes from a variety of sources, including:
1. Analyses of historical data and relationships related to each assumption from various sources,
including other government agencies and private forecasters;
2. SSAB Technical Panel on Methods and Assumptions Reports;
3. RDRC research; and
Social Security Administration
15
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
4. Other research relevant to the assumption.
The report uses information from a variety of Social Security program data sources, program and survey
data from other federal agencies, and data from other sources. OCACT identifies the information needed
for the evaluation in their documentation on the assumptions and methods used for the short-range
evaluation and for the long-range evaluation.
Methods: The report includes both a descriptive study of the current trust fund status and an
assessment that addresses the question, "Are program finances sufficient to pay scheduled benefits over
a
prospective 75-year period?' OCACT provides a detailed description of the methods used in each
report in the following two documents available on our public-facing website.
1. Long-Range OASDI Projection Methodology; and
2. Short-Range Actuarial Projections of the OASDI Program, 2010.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate significant challenges completing this assessment.
Dissemination: We use a variety of dissemination methods. The report is available on our public-
facing website. We send an electronic copy of the report to the President of the Senate, the Speaker of
the House, and to the Congressional committees of jurisdiction. The day the Trustees release the
report to the public, we issue a press release that describes the key findings and a link to the report on
our website. Our Chief Actuary participates in a discussion with members of the press to provide
information on the content within the report and to respond to their questions on the report. Our Chief
Actuary also meets with external stakeholders to present the findings, including, members of the
Congress and their staff, the SSAB, the Bipartisan Policy Center, the National Academy of Social
Insurance, and various actuarial professional organizations. In recent years, our Chief Actuary has
used social media (e.g., Facebook live) to disseminate the findings and to respond to questions from
the public on the financial status of the program.
Project 11 - Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
What is the current status of the SSI program and what are the estimated number of SSI
recipients and SSI program costs associated with administering the program over a prospective
25-year period?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193) directs the SSA Commissioner to report annually to
the President and to the Congress on the status of the SSI program. The report includes an
assessment of the status of the SSI program using systematic data collection and analysis. The report
must include estimates of two important SSI program outcomes: (1) the estimated number of SSI
recipients over a prospective period of at least 25 years, and (2) the estimated SSI program costs
through a prospective period of at least 25 years. The report must also include a comprehensive
description of the SSI program; a historical summary of statutory changes to the SSI program; and
summaries of any relevant research on the SSI program by SSA or others. Other requirements of the
report include historical and current data relating to:
1. Claims intake and dispositions at all levels of decision making;
2. Demographic information about recipients, including program cost and prior enrollment in other
Social Security Administration
16
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
public benefit programs;
3. Redeterminations, medical continuing disability reviews, and utilization of work incentives;
4. Administrative costs; and
5. State supplementation program operations.
This assessment of the status of the SSI program, the estimated number of recipients over a
prospective 25-year period, and the estimated program costs of the SSI program over a prospective 25-
year period provides policymakers with extensive information that they can use when considering
legislative changes, regulatory changes, or policy changes to the SSI program.
Information Needed for the Study: The information needed for the assessment is described in the
2020 annual report. The demographic and economic assumptions used in projections are based on the
intermediate set of assumptions of the Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal OASI and
Federal DI Trust Funds (Trustees Report) issued in that year. In addition, the projections are
developed to be consistent with the projections in such Trustees Report. Beyond that, there are four
main inputs to the current projection model for SSI recipients:
1. Historical and projected estimates of the Social Security area population by single year of age and
gender;
2. Historical tabulations of the numbers of recipients in current-payment status and suspense status
by whether the recipient is receiving payments based solely on age or due to disability, single year
of age, and gender;
3. Historical tabulations of the numbers of recipients transitioning into and out of SSI payment status
by the same characteristics as in (2) above; and
4. Historical tabulations of the total amount of federal SSI payments by the same characteristics
mentioned in (2) above.
Methods: The methods for conducting the projections are described in the 2020 annual report. Using
the inputs for the projection of SSI recipients described in the information needed for the evaluation or
study section, transitions into SSI payment status are projected separately for: (1) new recipients
resulting from an application for program payments; and (2) returns to payment status from suspended
status. Movements out of payment status are projected separately for: (1) terminations due to death;
(2) suspensions due to excess income; and (3) suspensions of payment for all other reasons. The
programmatic assumptions and methods are reexamined each year and, if warranted, revised
considering recent experience and new information about future conditions. We also consider analyses
of historical data and relationships related to each assumption from various sources, including other
government agencies and private forecasters, as well as other research relevant to the assumption or
set of assumptions.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate significant challenges completing this assessment.
Dissemination: We use a variety of dissemination methods. The report is available on our public-
facing website. We send electronic copies of the report to the President, the Vice-President, and the
Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives. We also send electronic copies to the Congressional
committees of jurisdiction and other interested Congressional members and staff.
Social Security Administration
17
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Project 12 - Pre-Effectuation Review of Disability Determinations
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTIONS
What is the return rate of state disability determination services (DDS) initial and reconsideration
allowances of disability program applications? What is the estimated federal benefit savings
attributable to the pre-effectuation review?
Context for the Evidence-Building Questions: Title Il of the Social Security Act (the Act) requires
the review of at least 50 percent of all DI initial and reconsideration allowances made by state DDSs.
We consider a disability allowance policy compliant when the evidence in the file is sufficient to
determine disability and when the determination is consistent with the evidence, federal regulations,
and operating policies and procedures.
Section 221(c)(3)(C) of the Act requires us to report to the Committee on Ways and Means of the
House of Representatives and to the Committee on Finance of the Senate on the pre-effectuation
reviews of state DDS disability determinations conducted during the previous fiscal year. The
legislative mandate specifies that the report include information on: (1) the numbers of such reviews;
and (2) our findings based on such reviews of the accuracy of the state DDS determinations.
In addition, Public Law 109-171, the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, added section 1633(e) to Title XVI
of the Act, requiring similar pre-effectuation reviews of specified levels of DDS allowances of
applications by persons aged 18 or older for SSI benefits based on blindness or disability. Since FY
2008, the required level of our SSI reviews is also at least 50 percent of initial and reconsideration
allowances.
In FY 2021, we established new pre-effectuation reviews of Federal Disability Processing Branch
favorable initial and reconsideration determinations. Although the reviews of these branches mirror
pre-effectuation reviews of DDSs, the above-mentioned statutes do not include cases adjudicated by
the federal branches. We use the same predictive models based on data captured in our quality
assurance samples and we use that data to score each case upon clearance to identify cases with a
high probability of reversal.
We use the findings from our assessment using systematic data collection and methods to identify
areas where additional training or policy guidance is needed.
Information Needed for the Study: Disability claim folders contain the evidence used to make
decisions on claims, and we review this evidence during pre-effectuation reviews. We use data from
our program data to estimate the program cost effects that result from the reviews of cases from the
DDSs.
Methods: We select cases for pre-effectuation review from the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and
DI cases from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico using a statistical model to identify allowances with a
high probability of containing substantive errors (i.e., potential to reverse the determination from
allowance to denial). For newly established pre-effectuation reviews, we select cases from eight
Federal Disability Processing Branches.
Quality reviewers within our disability quality review branches (DQB) review the cases to determine
whether the evidence documented in the files is sufficient to determine disability and whether that
determination made is consistent with the evidence and with federal regulations and operating policies
and procedures.
Social Security Administration
18
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
We record data on:
The total number of cases reviewed;
The number of decisional returns (i.e., the number of cases in which the quality review performed
by the DQB did not agree with the outcome determined by the DDS);
The number of documentation returns (i.e., the number of cases in which the quality review
performed by the DQB revealed the evidence upon which the DDS based its decision was
insufficient); and
The total number of returns (decisional returns plus documentation returns).
We compute the return rate as the total number of cases returned divided by the total number of cases
reviewed, multiplied by 100.
We use this data, combined with other data described in Table 2 in our Annual Report on Social
Security Pre-effectuation Reviews of Favorable State Disability Determinations, to estimate the
program cost effects attributable to the pre-effectuation review.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate significant challenges completing this assessment.
Dissemination: We send this annual pre-effectuation review report to Congress. The public may
obtain this report on our public-facing website and data from our open data website.
Project 13 - Targeted Denial Review
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
What is the return rate of state DDS initial and reconsideration denials of disability program
applications?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: The targeted denial review complements the pre-
effectuation review. It examines the return rate of all state DDS and Federal Disability Processing
Branch denials of applications for disability benefits. We draw the sample using a predictive model
based on data captured in our quality assurance samples. We use that data to score each case upon
DDS clearance to identify cases with a high probability of reversal.
We review disability determinations made by the DDSs and Federal Disability Processing Branches in
our 11 disability quality branches (DQB) in the Office of Quality Review field sites throughout the nation.
Our central office gathers the data from these reviews to produce monthly targeted denial review
reports for us at the national, regional, and state levels.
During our review, we identify cases that are not compliant with national disability policy. When we find
the disability determination does not comply with our policy and procedure, we cite a deficiency to the
DDS. We use the findings from our assessment, using systematic data collection and methods, to
identify areas where additional training or policy guidance is needed.
Information Needed for the Study: Disability claim folders contain the evidence used to make
determinations on claims. We review the evidence while conducting targeted denial reviews.
Methods: We select cases for targeted denial reviews from the DDSs in the 50 states, the District of
Columbia, 8 Federal Disability Processing Branches, and DI cases from the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico using a statistical model to identify allowances with a high probability of containing substantive
Social Security Administration
19
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
errors (i.e., potential to reverse the determination from denial to allowance). Quality reviewers within
our DQBs review the cases to determine whether the evidence documented in the file is sufficient to
support the denial determination and whether the denial determination is consistent with Federal
Regulations and operating policies and procedures.
We record data on:
The total number of cases reviewed;
The number of decisional deficiencies (i.e., the number of cases in which the DQB's quality review
performed did not agree with the outcome determined by the DDS);
The number of documentation deficiencies (i.e., the number of cases in which the quality review
performed by the DQB revealed the evidence upon which the DDS based its decision was
insufficient); and
The total number of deficiencies (decisional deficiencies plus documentation deficiencies) cited.
We compute the return rate as the total number of cases returned divided by the total number of cases
reviewed, multiplied by 100.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate significant challenges completing this assessment.
Dissemination: We make the data from targeted denial reviews available to the public on our public-
facing open data website.
Project 14 - Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
Stewardship Review
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
What is the payment accuracy rate related to the non-medical aspects of the Old-Age, Survivors
and Disability Insurance (OASDI) payments?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: The OASDI stewardship review provides an accuracy
measurement of the non-medical aspects of OASI payments and DI payments. The non-medical
aspects of OASI payments and DI payments include changes in payment amounts due to work activity
(e.g., the annual earnings test for OASI, or the performance of substantial gainful activity for DI) or
changes in payment due to application of a provision in the law (e.g., Windfall Elimination Provision,
Government Pension Offset, Workers Compensation Offset). Payment errors include both
underpayments (payments issued are less than what is due to beneficiaries) and overpayments
(payments issued are more than what is due to beneficiaries).
The OASI and DI stewardship review findings provide the basis for reports to monitoring authorities and
meet the reporting requirements of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2019. Additionally, we
use these findings to establish the OASDI payment accuracy performance measure in the Annual
Performance Report.
The OASDI stewardship review is an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of our
program and policies. The results are used to identify: (1) areas where additional training for our
employees is needed; (2) whether we need to develop legislative proposals to address issues with
administering the program (e.g., obtaining data on wage amounts from a payroll information provider);
or (3) whether we need to pursue program changes or pilot projects to test alternatives to the current
process and how we should design those changes.
Social Security Administration
20
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Information Needed for the Study: The information for this study is derived by quality reviewers
interviewing a sample of OASI and DI beneficiaries, or their representative payees, and redeveloping all
non-medical factors of eligibility to determine if the payment issued was correct according to the
applicable statutes and/or regulations. We also use data from our program data, such as the Master
Beneficiary Record, which includes the data related to the OASI or DI payment computations for
beneficiaries.
For each case in the sample with a payment error, the reviewers record a specific deficiency code that
represents the error associated with the improper payment, the dollar amount of the payment error, and
the specific cause of the error. There may be multiple deficiencies associated with a payment amount.
We construct separate aggregate overpayment or underpayment amounts for these cases when we
report our stewardship review findings.
Methods: We base the stewardship review on a monthly sample of Title Il beneficiaries in current
payment status. Each month, we selected approximately 88 OASI cases and 46 DI cases of
beneficiaries residing in the United States. Annually, we also select 160 cases of beneficiaries who live
outside of the 50 states or U.S. territories or receive U.S. totalization benefits. We interview the
beneficiary or his or her representative payee, make collateral contacts as needed, and redevelop all
non-medical factors of eligibility as of the sample month. The objective of the stewardship review is to
identify improper payments and not to assess our compliance with policy and procedures or predict the
impact of proposed changes to policies and procedures. Therefore, we assess payment accuracy
based on all the developed factors of entitlement that have any potential to affect the payment issued in
the sample month.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate significant challenges completing this assessment.
Dissemination: We report the findings from the OASDI stewardship review to OMB, provide a
summary of the findings in the Annual Performance Report, and post the report on our public-facing
website.
Project 15 - Supplemental Security Income Stewardship Review
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
What is the payment accuracy rate related to the non-medical aspects of SSI payments?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: Our SSI stewardship review provides estimates of
payment accuracy related to the non-medical aspects of SSI payments. SSI is a means-tested
program, and non-medical aspects of SSI payments may include living arrangements, resources,
wages, and other eligibility factors. Payment errors include both underpayments (payments issued are
less than what is owed to the recipient) and overpayments (payments issued are more than what is
owed to the recipient).
The stewardship review is a significant assessment tool for us. Its findings serve as the basis for
reports to monitor authorities and satisfy the reporting requirements of the Payment Integrity
Information Act of 2019. We use the stewardship data to identify error-prone areas and formulate
initiatives to reduce improper payments.
The SSI stewardship review is an assessment using systematic data collection and analysis of our
program and policies. The results are used to identify: (1) areas where additional training is needed for
our employees; (2) whether we need to develop legislative proposals to address issues with
Social Security Administration
21
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
administering the program (e.g., obtaining data on wage amounts from a payroll information provider);
or (3) whether we need to pursue program changes or pilot projects to test alternatives to the current
process and how we should design those changes.
Information Needed for the Study: The information for this study is derived by quality reviewers
interviewing a sample of SSI recipients or their representative payees, and redeveloping all non-
medical factors of eligibility to determine if the payments issued were correct according to applicable
statutes and regulations. We compare the quality review findings with our program data, such as the
Supplemental Security Record (SSR), which includes the data related to SSI payment computations for
recipients.
For each case in the sample with a payment error, the quality reviewer records the specific deficiency
that caused the improper payment, and the dollar amount of the payment error associated with the
specific deficiency. There may be multiple deficiencies associated with an SSI payment, and we
construct separate aggregate overpayment or underpayment amounts for these cases when we report
our stewardship review findings.
Methods: We derive accuracy rates using data collected from the review of a national sample of SSI
cases. For a case to be included in our sample, we must have issued a payment in at least 1 month of
the fiscal year under review. Historically, the sample has included about 4,000 cases.
The objective of the stewardship review is to identify and quantify improper payments. It involves
interviewing SSI recipients, or their representative payee, and redeveloping all non-medical factors of
eligibility to determine if the payments issued were correct according to the applicable statutes and
regulations. We use the resources necessary to obtain all relevant evidence needed to assess
payment accuracy for every case we review. Any difference between what was actually paid and what
the reviewer determines should have been paid is expressed as an overpayment or underpayment
error. It is not feasible operationally for us to conduct this review for all cases in the SSI universe on an
ongoing basis. For this reason, the review is not ideally suited to predict or assess the impact of
initiatives to reduce improper payments. The overpayment and underpayment accuracy rates are the
percentage of all dollars paid that are free of overpayments or under payments. We calculate and
report overpayment and underpayment accuracy rates separately. The data presented in the annual
stewardship report is weighted, enabling us to project the findings to the entire population of SSI
recipients.
Annually, we reevaluate our study methodology and the data elements we capture, based upon audit
findings and information needs identified throughout the year.
Anticipated Challenges: We do not anticipate significant challenges completing this assessment.
Dissemination: We report the findings from the SSI stewardship review to OMB, provide a summary
of the findings in the Annual Performance Report, and post the report on our public-facing website.
Social Security Administration
22
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Project 16 - Barriers Analysis
EVIDENCE-BUILDING QUESTION
To what extent are our policies, procedures, and practices effective in promoting equal employment
opportunities and creating greater diversity in our workforce?
Context for the Evidence-Building Question: Our Office of Civil Rights and Equal Opportunity
created a barrier analysis program that complies with Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
guidelines. This program helps us create a barrier-free workplace and enable equal employment
opportunities and a diverse workforce. We define a barrier as an agency policy, procedure, or
practice that limits or tends to limit employment opportunities for members of a particular equal
employment opportunity group such as groups based on sex, race, ethnic background, or disability
status.
The barrier analysis process is an investigation of triggers. We define triggers as any information that
alerts the agency of the need for additional scrutiny to determine if a barrier truly exists. To identify
triggers, we compare workforce data snapshots to benchmarks, and we note irregularities that may
point to potential barriers. Some barriers are perceptional and based on employees' opinions as
revealed in surveys such as the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey administered by the U.S.
Office of Personnel Management, and our exit surveys optionally completed by employees who
separate from the agency.
The goal of our investigation is to identify the root causes of barriers and develop plans to eliminate
those barriers at all levels of the workplace. We will conduct a new barrier analysis in FY 2023 and use
the information to develop a new action plan to eliminate barriers and help build an inclusive, engaged,
and empowered workforce.
Information Needed for the Study: We need data on the characteristics of our workforce employees,
job applicants, and people selected for employment, promotion, and developmental opportunities such
as our career development programs. We need data about equal employment opportunity complaints
and labor union grievances, which may be obtained from the Office of Labor-Management and
Employee Relations. We need to review Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey results and exit survey
results, which our Office of Strategy, Learning, and Workforce Development collects.
Methods: We use our administrative data to compare characteristics of job applicants and our
workforce within specific job positions, grade levels (including the Senior Executive Service), offices,
and career development programs to benchmarks that include the characteristics of our overall
workforce. When we identify discrepancies between the characteristics within a specific group (e.g.,
lower percentage of our Senior Executive Service members who have a disability compared to our
benchmark), we conduct a root cause analysis that includes interviews with key stakeholders to identify
whether our policies, procedures, and practices are barriers to equal employment opportunities. We
then develop an action plan to eradicate the barriers. We also analyze data from the Federal Employee
Viewpoint Survey and exit survey results, along with other data, to help us determine what factors
contribute to identified triggers.
Anticipated Challenges: Our ability to collect and analyze data through a variety of methods is limited
to available data; and we are committed to fulfilling any labor negotiations required.
Dissemination: We will disseminate the results of this evaluation project, as part of the Management
Directive 715 (MD-715) Report to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as required. The
report is made available to agency employees.
Social Security Administration
23
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan
Securing today
and tomorrow
SSA.gov
Social Security Administration
February 2022
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 Documentation
Produced and published at U.S. taxpayer expense
