Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018
Fiscal Years 2022-2026
Capacity Assessment
Securing today
USA
and tomorrow
Social Security Administration I
February 2022
CONTENTS
Contents
2
Introduction
3
Requirements
4
1
Activities and Operations being Evaluated and Analyzed
4
2
Evaluations, Research, Statistical Activities, and Data Analysis To Support Various Divisions
8
3
Balance Between Evaluation, Research, Statistics, and Data Analysis Needs
12
4
Methods Are Appropriate
16
5
Evaluation, Research, Statistics, and Data Analysis Capacity Present Within the Agency
18
6
Develop Evaluation, Research, Statistics, and Data Analysis Capacity
21
Selected Abbreviations
ALJ
Administrative Law Judge
CDR
Continuing Disability Review
DDS
Disability Determination Services
DI
Disability Insurance
OASDI
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
RDRC
Retirement and Disability Research Consortium
SSA
Social Security Administration
SSI
Supplemental Security Income
INTRODUCTION
The Fiscal Years 2022-2026 Capacity Assessment provides a baseline that we will use to measure
improvements to the coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence of our evaluation,
research, statistics, and data analysis. We develop internal capacity through investments in our
employees and our data infrastructure, and external capacity through partnerships with other Federal
agencies, academic institutions, private sector contractors, and the National Academy of Sciences.
Our evaluation capacity covers various types of evaluations including formative, process, outcome, and
impact evaluations. Our offices that specialize in conducting research and evaluations have experience
using quantitative methods, qualitative methods, and mixed methods for different purposes such as
assessing agency operations, determining if we are implementing policies as intended, and deciding if
we should implement new programs and policies. We made investments to enhance capacity in our
office that is designated a statistical unit under the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical
Efficiency Act (CIPSEA). We also invested in training and technology to improve data analysis. As our
research, evaluation, statistical, and data analysis needs change, we make corresponding changes to
our capacity to meet those needs.
We organized our capacity assessment using requirements described in the Foundations for Evidence-
Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act). The Evidence Act requires the Fiscal Years 2022-
2026 Capacity Assessment to include the following information.
1. A list of the activities and operations of the agency that are currently being evaluated and
analyzed.
2. The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency support the needs of various divisions within the agency.
3. The extent to which the evaluation research and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency address an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational learning, ongoing
program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency and private
sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability.
4. The extent to which the agency uses methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate
to agency divisions and the corresponding research questions being addressed, including an
appropriate combination of formative and summative evaluation research and analysis
approaches.
5. The extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present within the agency to include
personnel and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities,
disseminating best practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback.
6. The extent to which the agency has the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to
develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-
day operations.
In our capacity assessment, we provide information for each of these requirements.
Social Security Administration
3
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
REQUIREMENTS
1
ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS BEING EVALUATED AND ANALYZED
List of the activities and operations of the agency that are currently being evaluated and
analyzed.
We identify the activities and operations that we are currently evaluating or conducting evidence-
building activities in four separate documents that we publish on an annual basis. We describe many of
our planned research and evaluations in our Annual Report on Section 234 Demonstration Projects that
we submit to the Congress, and in a section of the Supplemental Security Income Program Technical
Materials Supporting Our Annual Budget titled Research, Demonstration Projects, and Outreach. Our
Annual Performance Report includes an appendix titled Program Assessments that describes our
ongoing studies and surveys to assess the effectiveness of our programs. A description of our pilot
program evaluations is located in the Pilot Program Metrics section of the Limitations on Administrative
Expenses section of our Annual Budget. Below, we identify the list of research and evaluation activities
that we describe in more detail in these documents.
Demonstration Projects
Our Annual Report on Section 234 Demonstration Projects that we deliver to the Congress each year
provides additional information on the following demonstration projects.
Promoting Work through Early Interventions Project: Identifies, selects, and evaluates programs likely
to improve the employment and economic outcomes of individuals who have not yet applied for SSI
and have little or no work history, have current or foreseeable disabilities, and have ties to U.S.
safety net programs.
Retaining Employment and Talent After Injury/Illness Network (RETAIN) Demonstration Evaluates early
interventions that focus on the early coordination of health care and employment-related supports
and services to help injured or ill workers remain in the workforce.
Promoting Readiness of Minors in SSI (PROMISE): Evaluates interventions that improve the health,
education, and post-school outcomes of children who receive SSI, including the completion of
postsecondary education and employment.
Ohio Direct Referral Demonstration: Evaluates the effectiveness of providing direct referrals to
vocational rehabilitation services for 18 and 19 year-olds who are, or may become, SSI or SSDI
beneficiaries.
Supported Employment Demonstration (SED) Evaluates whether offering evidence-based
interventions of integrated vocational, medical, and behavioral health services to individuals with
behavioral health challenges can significantly reduce the demand for disability benefits and help
individuals remain in the labor force.
Promoting Opportunity Demonstration (POD): Evaluates the effect of a $1 for $2 benefit offset with
simplified work incentives for DI beneficiaries on earnings, benefit payments, and the DI Trust Fund.
Lessons Learned from SSA Demonstrations: Assesses the lessons learned from prior tests of
new policies.
Social Security Administration
4
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Additional Activities in FY 2022 Research, Demonstration Projects, and Outreach Exhibit
The Research, Demonstration Projects, and Outreach section of our Supplemental Security Income
Program Technical Materials Supporting Our Annual Budget describes additional research and
evidence-building activities that we plan to complete.
Ticket to Work (TTW) Notice Optimization: Evaluates the impact of targeting outreach to TTW-eligible
beneficiaries on participation in the TTW program and employment.
Ticket to Work Evaluation: Assesses TTW program operations and experiences of the services users.
Beyond Benefits Study: Identifies the types of services and supports that individuals exiting the DI or
SSI programs need to maintain or achieve self-sufficiency.
National Beneficiary Survey: Collects data from a nationally representative sample of DI beneficiaries
and SSI recipients on a wide range of topics not available in our administrative data or in other
public databases. These data include health and functional status, health insurance coverage,
interest in work, barriers to work, use of services, work history, income, and experience with Social
Security programs.
Disability Research Surveys: Includes three surveys. The first of the three surveys will be an
additional round of the NBS, awarded in FY 2021 and fielded in FY 2023. The second will be
awarded in FY 2023 and fielded in FY 2025, and it will focus on helping us better understand SSDI
and SSI applicants' experiences, their use of services, and the pathways they take before and after
application. We will identify the topics for a final survey based on input from stakeholders, such as
agency leaders, OMB, or Congress.
Disability Perceptions Survey: Assesses the knowledge, perceptions, and opinions working-age
adults have about the DI program.
Understanding America Study Enhancements: Informs our evaluation of the public's knowledge of
Social Security programs through an innovative, nationally representative longitudinal
internet panel.
Occupational Information System (collaboration with Bureau of Labor Statistics): Updates information on
the requirements of work in the national economy.
Work Disability - Functional Assessment Battery (WD-FAB) Data Collection: Provides the necessary data
to evaluate the potential uses and value of the WD-FAB in our CDR process.
SSA-National Institutes of Health Research on Data Analytics and the Work Disability-Functiona
Assessment Battery (WD-FAB): Provides in-depth analysis of our existing data and continues to
provide us support related to evaluating the WD-FAB in our CDR process. The WD-FAB may
provide uniform information about individuals' self-reported functional ability that we can use to
inform our disability data collection and determination processes.
Advisory Services to Assist SSA with Disability Issues: Continues our work on research into disability
issues through a five-year contract (awarded in FY 2018) with the National Academy of Sciences
(NAS). NAS established a new standing committee of medical, vocational, and other experts to
assist with policy issues.
Interventional Cooperative Agreement Program (ICAP): Facilitates collaboration with States, private
foundations, and others who have the interest and ability to identify, operate, and partially fund
interventional research.
Retirement and Disability Research Consortium (RDRC): Comprises four competitively selected
research centers based at the University of Michigan, Boston College, the National Bureau of
Social Security Administration
5
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Economic Research (NBER), and the University of Wisconsin-Madison that are broadly charged
with planning, initiating, and maintaining a high quality, multidisciplinary research and evaluation
program that covers retirement, disability, and Social Security program issues.
Blanket Purchase Order Agreement for Time Sensitive Research Projects: Provides an alternate research
channel for policy and program assessments and studies related to social science, medical, or
vocational rehabilitation topics.
Health and Retirement Study: Provides data on health and economic well-being after retirement that
is not available in our program data.
Census Bureau Surveys: Provides supplemental data from two Census Bureau data collections
efforts: (1) the Survey of Income and Program Participation; (2) the new "Ask US" Panel.
Activities in Annual Performance Report "Program Assessments"
The Program Assessments appendix of our Annual Performance Report includes information on the
following evidence-building activities.
Office Visitor Surveys (Biennial): Measures customer satisfaction with our in-person service and
includes the field office and hearing office segment, and the Social Security Card Center segment.
Prospective Client Survey (Biennial): Measures the service expectations and preferences of the
upcoming wave of retirees.
Retirement Application Survey (Biennial): Measures customer satisfaction with the retirement
application process and identifies service expectations and preferences for future service among
recent retirees.
Federal Information Security Modernization Act Report (Annually): Measures whether our overall
information technology security and privacy programs and practices comply with the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act of 2014.
Safeguard Review (Triennial): Assesses the use of Federal tax information and the measures we
employ to protect this information.
Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal
Disability Insurance Trust Funds (Annually): Assesses the financial and actuarial status of the two
Social Security trust funds.
Annual Report to Congress on Medical Continuing Disability Reviews (Annually): Assesses medical
CDRs conducted for a completed fiscal year (FY), including actuarial estimates of the lifetime
savings in OASDI, SSI, Medicare, and Medicaid benefits resulting from the reviews conducted
during that fiscal year.
Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program (Annually): Assesses the status of the SSI
program and provides 25-year projections of program participation and costs.
Assessment of the Continuing Disability Review Enforcement Operation Predictive Model (Annually):
Assesses the results of a predictive model used to score work issue CDR cases to ensure that
cases most likely to result in overpayments are prioritized to help prevent the accrual of greater
overpayments.
Human Capital Evaluations (Annually): Monitors and assesses how well human capital policies and
programs support our mission accomplishments and is a critical step in assessing organizational
performance and determining how to improve processes.
Social Security Administration
6
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Management Directive 715 Report (Annually): Describes the status of our efforts to establish and
maintain effective equal employment affirmative action programs under Section 717 of Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and effective affirmative action programs under Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
Pre-Effectuation Review of Disability Determinations (Annually): Assesses the accuracy of initial and
reconsideration disability allowances made by DDSs as required in the Social Security Act.
Targeted Denial Review (Annually): Assesses the accuracy of initial and reconsideration disability
denials made by the DDSs.
Retirement, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Stewardship Review (Annually): Assesses the accuracy of
payments to persons receiving Social Security retirement, survivors, or disability benefits.
Supplemental Security Income Stewardship Review (Annually): Assesses the accuracy of payments to
persons receiving SSI benefits by reviewing all non-medical factors of eligibility and payment.
Supplemental Security Income Transaction Accuracy Review (Annually): Assesses the adjudicative
accuracy of SSI initial claims, redeterminations, and limited issues to ensure compliance with
operational policy.
Retirement, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Transaction Accuracy Review (Triennial): Assesses
recently processed retirement, survivors, and disability insurance claims to ensure compliance with
operational policy.
Enumeration Accuracy Report (Triennial): Assesses the accuracy of original Social Security numbers
assigned during the fiscal year.
Activities in FY 2022 "Pilot Program Metrics"
The Pilot Projects Metrics sub-section of the Limitations on Administrative Expenses section of our
annual budget submission includes information on the following active pilot projects.
Ticket to Work Notice Optimization: The Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act of
1999 established the Ticket to Work program that provides DI and SSI beneficiaries with more
options for receiving employment services. This project tests modified versions of the notices we
send to beneficiaries and changes to the notice schedule to determine if the changes reduce the
barriers to assigning a Ticket.
SSA Mobile Wage Reporting Pilot: Mobile Knowledge-based Wage Reporting is a mobile phone
application available in the Apple and Google play stores for SSI recipients, their representative
payees, and their spouses. This pilot will determine the viability of new technologies to replace the
existing mobile wage reporting application with a hybrid application.
OARO Hearing Recordings and Transcriptions Incubation: This pilot explores using technology to
generate written transcripts from the previously recorded hearings. There is the potential for
significant savings in time and resources for the agency. Additionally, the pilot will determine the
viability of using automation to process previously recorded hearings into official court transcripts,
including an automated workflow where possible.
Office of Quality Review Group Il Deficiencies Pilot: The goal of this pilot is to reduce improper
payments by quickly identifying deficiencies related to onset and/or disability cessation dates and
assigning the correct code on reviews with minimal human intervention by leveraging Intelligent
Medical Analysis GENeration (IMAGEN) to accelerate the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI). This will
Social Security Administration
7
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
aid in the reduction of decision errors made on CDR cessations, childhood disability benefit claims,
and established onset dates for prior denial periods with well-defined results.
Office of Hearings Operations (OHO) Hearing Recordings & Transcriptions Pilot: OHO is currently
conducting video disability hearings using MS Teams. Currently, the DRAP system records the
audio for disability hearings. For this pilot, we are testing the MS Teams recording function to
record disability hearings. We will leverage MS Teams live transcription and closed captioning
features to create a text transcript of the disability court hearing in real time as the hearing occurs.
By investing in recording hearings in MS Teams, there is the potential for significant savings in time
and resources for the agency. Additionally, MS Teams recordings would automate and simplify
creation of official court hearing transcripts needed for disability hearing appeals.
Video Interviews for Workloads: During the COVID-19 pandemic, we piloted a new MS Teams
service delivery option for certain Social Security replacement cards in November 2020 at 100 of
our highest enumeration workload offices. The initial results of the pilot are promising, and we will
continue to assess this new service delivery option as we roll it out nationally.
United States Postal Service (USPS) Proof of Concept (PoC) for Digital Identity: If customers are unable
to verify their identity online for a my Social Security account, they may verify their identity in-person
to begin the registration process. This method is known as in-person proofing (IPP) and is currently
available only at our field offices. The USPS PoC will allow customers to verify their identity in- -
person at certain USPS facilities.
Headquarters Mail Digitization Pilot: In March 2021, we developed a 12-month pilot to digitize
approximately 96,000 pieces of mail we receive in six headquarters components. Using our
Headquarters Mail Service Center, we will sort incoming mail and bulk ship to our scanning vendor.
The scanning vendor will open, prepare, scan, and save the images to a shared server.
Participating employees will be able to access the electronic mail from the server and process their
workloads virtually.
2
EVALUATIONS, RESEARCH, STATISTICAL ACTIVITIES, AND DATA ANALYSIS TO
SUPPORT VARIOUS DIVISIONS
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency support the needs of various divisions within the agency
Our evaluations, research, statistical activities, and data analysis efforts meet the needs of various
divisions within the agency. We regularly monitor our capacity to support evaluations, research,
statistical activities, and data analysis needs of various divisions within the agency; and we hire and
train employees to ensure we are meeting agency-wide needs. We make investments in data and in
our IT infrastructure that provide a foundation for the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and
related activities. We identify and obtain external expertise that our various divisions use to support
their needs. As we continue to expand our evidence-building activities, we will reassess these needs
and request additional resources, as appropriate.
We have several offices that work closely with other divisions within the agency to ensure that our
evaluation, research, statistical, and data analysis efforts meet agency-wide needs. These offices
communicate regularly with the various divisions within the agency to assess needs on a regular basis,
and they develop plans to meet their needs. Below, we describe how our evaluation, research,
statistical, and analytics offices identify and support the evaluation needs of our various divisions.
Social Security Administration
8
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Our Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics (ORES) obtains information on a regular basis
on the research and evaluations needs of various divisions within the agency and sends an annual
memorandum to the Social Security Advisory Board that requests information on their priorities for
agency research and evaluation activities. ORES uses this information to set their research plan for
in-house research and evaluations. ORES has conducted in-house research and evaluations that
address the needs of various divisions by providing information on: changes to the Social Security
Statement, the income of the aged population; disability trends; modernizing the DI and SSI
disability determination process; the methods and assumptions used for the Annual Report of the
Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance
Trust Funds (Trustees Report); and the relationship between State and local government pension
programs and the OASDI program. ORES also uses the information to set the plan for research and
evaluations conducted by external entities such as the Retirement and Disability Research Consortium
(RDRC) centers and external organizations under the Blanket Purchase Order Agreement for Time
Sensitive Research Projects. These two external resources include the capacity to conduct quick
turnaround projects that various divisions may use to support research, evaluations, and evidence-
building activities.
ORES is also an OMB designated statistical unit under the Confidential Information Protection and
Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA) and is responsible for producing and disseminating core
statistical products (publications and tables) about Social Security. These statistical products
support the needs of various divisions within the agency and inform external stakeholder research
and evaluation activities. ORES is obligated to carry out four fundamental responsibilities as a
statistical unit:
1. Produce and disseminate relevant and timely information. ORES is a team of researchers with
long-standing SSA careers who built and maintained knowledge about Social Security and other
economic programs and policies, and who have analyzed the implication of those programs and
policies. Through development of our research agenda, particularly the RDRC research agenda
and discussion at the annual RDRC conference, ORES seeks input from various divisions within
the agency and from external stakeholders including the Social Security Advisory Board, the
Office of Management and Budget, and the broader research community. ORES also regularly
interacts with the Social Security Advisory Board (SSAB) to exchange information about
research interests. ORES collects public and private sector input through our website
(https://www.ssa.gov/policy/).
ORES recently made major investments in modernizing statistical publication processes, and
built a state-of-the-art data analysis platform that various divisions within the agency use to
conduct evidence-building activities (information on the platform is located here). ORES uses
its web presence to disseminate statistical information and reports (https://www.ssa.gov/policy/).
2. Conduct credible and accurate statistical activities. ORES ensures the use of sound statistical
methods and accuracy with our rigorous research and disclosure review processes. ORES
provides references within statistical tables and research papers that explain data collection,
limitations, and sources of error. ORES provides publication schedules and notifications on our
website (https://www.ssa.gov/policy/).
3. Conduct objective statistical activities. ORES maintains functional separation and
independence from the operational and enforcement side of SSA. ORES never provides data
or participates in actions intended to directly affect the rights, privileges, or benefits of a
particular individual. We have independent data access controls, and ORES research is
impartial.
4. Protect the trust of information providers by ensuring the confidentiality and exclusive statistical
use of their responses. ORES maintains functional separation from the operational and
enforcement side of SSA, employs disclosure protection techniques, and only use data we
Social Security Administration
9
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
collect or obtain from other federal statistical agencies for research and statistical (non-
enforcement) purposes.
We monitor our capacity to fulfill our responsibilities as a designated statistical unit, and we make
requests for staff and resources. As we implement the requirements for statistical units under Title
III of the Evidence Act, we will reassess our needs and request the necessary resources to carry
out our responsibilities.
Our Office of Research, Demonstration, and Employment Support (ORDES) has worked with
teams in other offices to support impact evaluations and data analysis on the DI and SSI programs.
ORDES conducts beneficiary surveys to supplement information available in administrative records
that can help the agency answer important questions about individuals' experiences with the
disability programs. ORDES leads a cross-agency demonstration workgroup and encourages
participants to suggest topics for future projects. They brief Congressional staff on research results
and solicit ideas for new demonstration projects. ORDES maintains research partnerships with
other Federal agencies and seeks input from internal stakeholders to inform future research and
analytical activities.
Our Office of Quality Review (OQR) conducts agency-level research, analysis, and special
projects to support the needs of various divisions within the agency; more specifically, the office
offers advice and recommendations on a range of issues related to quality and performance
management in each of the agency's core business processes. OQR supports internal customers
including the Commissioner, the Principal Deputy Commissioner, and component-level Deputy
Commissioners. OQR also provides services to external customers including Congress, the Office
of Management and Budget, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG), and financial auditors.
Our Office of Appellate Operations (OAO) provides adjudicators and policymakers with data-
driven feedback on the performance of the hearings process in accordance with the direct
delegation of authority from the Commissioner to the Appeals Council. OAO collects and analyzes
nationwide data on policy compliance of adjudicators and performance of the SSA disability
adjudication process. OAO also shares findings with other agency components for use in feedback
to adjudicators and staff, improvements in training, and clarification of agency policies and
procedures. In collecting and analyzing nationwide data, OAO also tracks and analyzes court
case trends.
Our Office of Analytics and Improvement (OAI) collaborates with agency divisions and
technology experts to perform analyses of agency data, provide management consultation, and
develop innovative business solutions to drive agency priorities, improve operations efficiency,
increase organizational performance, and meet strategic goals and objectives.
Our Office of the Chief Actuary (OCACT) provides technical and consultative services to support
the needs of various divisions within the agency, the Commissioner, and the Board of Trustees of
the Social Security trust funds. OCACT conducts research and analyses to support the Annual
Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal
Disability Insurance Trust Funds (OASDI Trustees Reports), which are available to the public here:
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/TR/2021/index.html. OCACT conducts research and analyses to support
the Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program (SSI Reports), which are
available here: https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/ssir/SSI21/index.html. In addition to these major annual
reports, OCACT conducts research and analyses published as notes located here:
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/NOTES/actnote.html;and published as studies located here:
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/NOTES/actstud.html. OCACT disseminates statistical data on the
program that are available here: https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/ProgData/benefits.html and
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/ProgData/funds.html. OCACT also conducts analyses of comprehensive
Social Security Administration
10
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
legislative proposals located here: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/solvency/index.html and individual
provisions that are available here: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/solvency/provisions/index.html
Our Office of Systems (OS) supports various divisions within the agency on their data analysis
and evaluation needs in a number of ways, including through the Advanced Data Analytics Lab (ADAL)
that primarily uses agency administrative data to conduct innovative program evaluations, policy
evaluations, predictive analytics, descriptive analytics, data quality analysis, prototype new
technologies and machine learning projects. OS also leads the continual development and
expansion of the Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW), which provides our employees and program offices
with access to our master data files and management information data, as well as the infrastructure
to perform the data analysis necessary for our research and evaluation activities. The EDW
provides the foundation for our research, evaluation, statistics, and data analysis activities.
We adjust our research and evaluation activities as the needs of our divisions change. For example, as
we invested in modernizing our information technology infrastructure to improve service delivery, we
also invested in broader research and evaluations to improve service delivery-including creating a
new service delivery focal area for our Retirement and Disability Research Consortium (RDRC)
grantees. Updating the occupational information used to administer the disability program is another
agency priority. We invested in a new survey to develop updated occupational information to
eventually help us make disability decisions, and we completed extensive analysis of the new data to
determine how to best use the data for our programs.
While we respond to internal needs, we also adjust our activities to reflect broader, external factors.
We continue to conduct studies seeking to improve the labor force participation of our disability
beneficiaries, testing the effects of alternative policies and services on employment and benefit
outcomes. In recent years, we also collaborated with other agencies to test interventions that may help
people maintain their attachment to the workforce and prevent or delay application for
disability benefits.
Finally, we seek external expertise to support the research and evaluation needs of various divisions
within our agency. In addition to working with private contractors on various research and evaluation
projects, we developed the following programs that provide our various divisions with more timely
research and evaluation expertise to support our programs, policies, and operations.
A contract with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to conduct research that informs our
disability programs. NAS established a standing committee of medical, vocational, and other
experts to assist us with policy issues. It manages Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA)
compliant consensus study committees; organizes and leads workshops with subject matter
experts; and plans and organizes outreach conferences with members of the public.
A Retirement and Disability Research Consortium (RDRC) cooperative agreement that comprises four
competitively selected research centers based at the University of Michigan, Boston College, the
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The
centers perform valuable research and evaluation of retirement and disability policy, disseminate
results, provide training awards, and facilitate the use of our program data by outside researchers.
To give SSA flexibility to fund projects outside of the annual project award cycle, we include funds
in each center's budget for "quick-turnaround projects," or QTPs. The primary goal of QTPs is to
respond to a high-priority research area that may not have been a priority when the focal area list
was developed. A recent example of an SSA-initiated call for QTPs is a request for research on the
impacts of COVID-19. This resulted in three projects being funded-two awarded in May 2020 and
one awarded in June 2020.
Social Security Administration
11
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
A new Interventional Cooperative Agreement Program (ICAP) that will facilitate collaboration with States,
private foundations, and others who have the interest and ability to identify, operate, and partially
fund interventional research related to the DI and SSI programs.
A Blanket Purchase Order Agreement for Time Sensitive Research Projects aimed at providing an
alternate research channel for policy and program assessments and studies related to social
science, medical, or vocational rehabilitation topics.
3
BALANCE BETWEEN EVALUATION, RESEARCH, STATISTICS, AND DATA
ANALYSIS NEEDS
The extent to which the evaluation research and analysis efforts and related activities of the
agency address an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational learning,
ongoing program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency
and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and accountability.
Our evaluation, research, analysis, and related activities strike an appropriate balance between needs
related to organizational learning, ongoing program management, performance management, strategic
management, interagency and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight, and
accountability. In this section, we organize the evaluation, research, analysis, and related activities by
the Deputy Commissioner-level office that oversees such activities and describe how the activities
address an appropriate balance between various needs.
1. Our Office of Analytics, Review, and Oversight (OARO) specializes in evaluating program
operations and management and provides feedback to our operational components on their
performance based on quality reviews and special studies. These reviews support organizational
learning in that they identify the prevalence of specific deficiencies when conducting a particular
workload. When deficiencies on a specific policy or workload are prevalent, we use the reviews to
identify training needs. The OARO studies support ongoing program management, performance
management, strategic management, internal and external oversight, and accountability. The
OARO organization includes our Chief Data Officer who is leading the development of our
Enterprise Data Strategy (EDS). The EDS is designed to ensure that we can provide timely,
accurate, objective, and relevant statistical data to drive agency-wide evidence-based decision-
making. The EDS will include a strategic vision and tactical roadmap that lays out the key steps of
an actionable plan to implement the strategy.
2. Our Office of Retirement and Disability Policy (ORDP) specializes in broader policy analysis that
involves estimating the effect of broader changes to programs and policies. ORDP often
collaborates with other Federal agencies, State agencies, and the private sector when conducting
these evaluations. Thus, ORDP studies support organizational learning related to the effects of
program or policy changes, and also support interagency and private sector coordination. ORDP
reports the results of its research and demonstration projects in an annual report to Congress,
which has external oversight over the work and supports accountability. In addition, ORES,
organizationally located within ORDP, is a principal federal statistical unit under the Confidential
Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA) and has responsibilities for producing
and disseminating core statistical products (publications and tables) about Social Security. These
statistical products support and inform organizational learning and program management.
3. Our Office of the Chief Actuary (OCACT) conducts research and evaluation studies to support
organizational learning, program management, internal and external oversight, and accountability
Social Security Administration
12
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
by planning and directing a program of actuarial estimates and analyses relating to our OASDI
programs and SSI program, and to proposed changes in those programs.
OARO includes three sub-offices (OAI, OAO, and OQR) that conduct research, evaluation efforts, and
related activities that support organizational learning, ongoing program management, performance
management, strategic management, internal and external oversight, and accountability. For example,
OQR conducts assessments and studies on many of our program operations, including the following
studies.
The Pre-effectuation Review of Disability Decisions and the Targeted Denial Review of Disability Decisions
assess the quality of disability decisions that are made by DDSs located in the 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. These reviews support organizational learning by providing feedback
on disability decision deficiencies to the DDSs and identifying potential training needs. They support
ongoing program and performance management as we use the results of the assessment for
performance metrics, and we include the results in our Annual Performance Report. The reviews
support internal and external oversight, as well as accountability, as we use the results to assess
DDS performance. We provide Congress an annual report of the results.
The OASDI Stewardship Review and the SSI Stewardship Review assess the payment accuracy rate
related to the non-medical aspects of payments. These reviews support organizational learning by
providing us with feedback on the sources of payment errors and identifying potential training
needs. They support ongoing program and performance management as we use the results of the
evaluation for performance metrics. We summarize the results in our Annual Performance Report.
The evaluations meet the reporting requirements of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2019
and support external oversight and accountability by providing the results in reports to monitoring
authorities. Additionally, they support internal oversight and accountability as we use these findings
to establish the Title Il Payment Accuracy Performance Measure in the Agency Strategic Plan.
Special studies throughout the year to evaluate the efficiency and/or accuracy of our various other
workloads. We generally conduct these studies to support organizational learning, program
management, performance management, strategic management, internal oversight, and
accountability.
OAO contributes to organizational learning, program management, performance management, internal
oversight, and accountability by providing adjudicators and policymakers with data-driven feedback on
the performance of the hearings process in accordance with the direct delegation of authority from the
Commissioner to the Appeals Council. In FY 2010, OAO established a Division of Quality to implement
the provisions of the regulations that permit the Appeals Council to consider a random or selective
sample of un-appealed hearing decisions for possible own motion review. OAO's quality reviews
include the following activities.
Post-effectuation Quality Reviews of ALJ Decisions. In FY 2011, OAO's Division of Quality began
conducting post-effectuation reviews in the form of focused quality reviews of ALJ decisions. Post-
effectuation means the ALJ decision is final, and the agency will not take any further action on the
case. The Division of Quality conducts post-effectuation focused quality reviews, in part, to identify
(a) recurrent decisional issues for incorporation into future focused training and (b) where the
agency may need to change policy or hearing office procedures.
Pre-effectuation Quality Reviews of ALJ Decisions. Beginning in FY 2011, OAO's Division of Quality
began conducting pre-effectuation reviews of randomly selected favorable hearing decisions before
we made any payments to claimants. The Division of Quality conducts pre-effectuation reviews, in
part, to (a) address error-prone adjudication issues and (b) focus on error-prone patterns involving
impairments or other specific criteria.
Social Security Administration
13
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Special studies. OAO's Division of Quality occasionally conducts other studies, such as the FY 2016
Appeals Council remand order study, for quality purposes.
OAI performs research, evaluations, and related activities that include the analyses of agency data.
OAI provides management consultation and develops innovative business solutions to drive agency
priorities, improve operations efficiency, increase organizational performance, and meet strategic goals
and objectives. OAI works collaboratively with other components to enhance SSA's programs and
processes through data analytics, developing innovative business solutions, and enhancing value
realization with program management support. In these efforts, OAI operates in five major
functional areas:
Division of the Analytics Center of Excellence: Supports evidence-based policies and decision-
making across the agency using artificial intelligence, machine learning, and advanced analytics.
Designs, manages, and updates predictive models and provides statistical analysis in support of
agency program integrity and quality review efforts.
Division of Analysis, Development, and Support: Develops custom applications that streamline
processes, visualizes data, and provides in-depth data analysis.
Division of Programmatic Support: Identifies case processing efficiencies using data analysis and
programmatic expertise and develops automated assistance software that support frontline
payment-related activities and workloads.
Division of Continuous Improvement Programs: Assesses processes, programs, policies, and
procedures to identify areas of improvement and possible solutions through documenting business
processes, workflow diagrams, and/or surveys. Develops complex business process simulation
models and enables budget and resource planning and decision making by providing key data.
Division of Enterprise Program Management Operations: Increases Programs and Projects' (P/PM)
delivery success, promotes enterprise-wide P/PM standards, enhances value realization, and
strengthens the P/PM profession across the agency through enhanced decision-making and
business capabilities.
OAI leverages our modern Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) and Big Data Platform (BDP) to provide
advanced analytical support including artificial intelligence, machine learning, and natural language
processing solutions to serve all agency components.
Some examples of OAI's efforts to foster and nurture evidence-based decision-making are as follows.
Insight is an innovative decision support software that uses natural language processing and
artificial intelligence to automatically "read" the text of disability decisions and identify potential
quality issues. Insight also offers case-specific reference information and powerful tools to help
adjudicators efficiently issue high quality decisions. Utilizing Insight will improve the quality,
consistency, and efficiency of the disability adjudication process. It is a core project in our IT
Modernization (Disability) Plan and our CARES Plan.
Enumeration Reports and Data Visualization Dashboards. OAI has designed, developed, and
deployed management information reports including data charts and visualizations that are updated
weekly to allow executives to monitor enumeration workloads across various service delivery
channels such as online and in field offices. In addition, OAI has created a data dashboard that
provides year over year comparisons and monthly updates for the enumerations workload, broken
out by service delivery channel and for citizens and non-citizens. Most recently, OAI added an
additional reporting dashboard focused specifically on the enumerations workload conducted
through Microsoft Teams. This report allows SSA leadership to track and assess the
implementation of the new Microsoft Teams interview capability during its phased rollout.
Social Security Administration
14
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Court Remands Dashboard. OAI has designed and delivered visual graphical dashboards that
merge data from multiple administrative systems to improve strategic decision making. Specifically,
it provides data about final agency decisions on claims made in Federal courts; it is used to identify
any needed adjustments in allocation of personnel resources; and it is used to assess whether the
recent changes to the disability regulations and program rules are meeting the expectations for
improved outcomes in Federal courts.
ORDP conducts research, evaluations, and related activities that support organizational learning,
program management, strategic management, interagency coordination, internal and external
oversight, and accountability. Below, we provide several examples that demonstrate our activities are
striking a good balance at meeting these various objectives.
We will collect information about the service, medical, and employment needs of working-age
adults exiting Social Security disability programs because of medical improvement. The Beyond
Benefits Study will include qualitative and quantitative data collection as well as small-scale use of
Motivational Interviewing to gain more insight into the needs and barriers with respect to promoting
sustained and substantial work activity leading to self-sufficiency among those leaving the disability
rolls. The information collected will help to identify potential interventions and inform policy
recommendations that may help these individuals achieve successful employment outcomes.
The development of a number of SSA questions that the Census Bureau added to their new
Household Pulse Survey (HPS), which they launched to learn about the national COVID-19 response.
The Census Bureau selected six of our questions to include in the HPS Phase 2 Questionnaire,
which they began fielding on August 19, 2020. Findings from this survey will help SSA evaluate
trends in benefit applications during the COVID-19 pandemic, including applications for OASDI,
SSI, and Medicare.
An Interventional Cooperative Agreement Program (ICAP) that will allow us to collaborate with states,
private foundations, and others who have the interest and ability to identify, operate, and partially
fund interventional research. The research and interventions under this program will target the
increased employment and self-sufficiency of individuals with disabilities (whether beneficiaries,
applicants, or potential applicants of the DI or SSI programs) that could lead to a reduction in DI or
SSI participation. Projects may also address agency priorities such as assisting claimants in
underserved communities apply for DI or SSI benefits or conducting outreach to children with
disabilities who are potentially eligible to receive SSI. This program will provide a process through
which we can systematically review demonstration proposals from outside organizations and enter
into agreements to collaborate with these non-Federal groups.
Research and analysis to inform the occupational information used for the disability determination
process. This includes a collaboration with the Bureau of Labor Statistics on the Occupational
Requirements Survey (ORS) that provides us with the data we need on the requirements of work.
ORDP research staff also completed extensive research and data analysis documenting recent
trends in the requirements of work in the modern economy to support revised regulations.
Research and analysis to inform the assumptions and methods used for the Annual Report of the
Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust
Funds. This includes analysis of demographic trends, economic trends, and beneficiary trends.
OCACT conducts research and evaluation studies that support organizational learning, ongoing
program management, performance management, strategic management, interagency coordination,
Social Security Administration
15
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
and accountability. Below, we provide several examples that demonstrate our activities are striking a
good balance at meeting these various objectives.
Annual evaluations of the operations of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund
and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, including work on the Annual Report of the Board of
Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds
(OASDI Trustees Report). OCACT performs the evaluations and projections for the report; and the
OASDI Trustees review and signoff on the report. This evaluation provides a foundation for many
of our evaluation activities because an important outcome in many of our evaluations is the program
cost effect on the trust funds.
Annual assessment of the operations of the SSI program that supports organizational learning,
program management, strategic management, external oversight, and accountability. This includes
leading the agency's work on the Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program (SSI Report).
This evaluation provides a foundation for many of our evaluations related to changes in the SSI
program because an important outcome in many of our evaluations is the effect on SSI payments
and SSI program costs or savings.
Actuarial and demographic research on social insurance and related program issues that supports
organizational learning and program management, including:
- the research and analysis that informs the methods and assumptions within the OASDI Trustees
Report that is posted on our website: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/TR/2021/index.html; and
- other actuarial studies and notes that supplement the OASDI Trustees Report, SSI report, or
provide information on the program that are posted here: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/pubs.html,
Projections of our future workloads. This is critical to our planning and budgeting process and
supports program management and strategic management.
4
METHODS ARE APPROPRIATE
The extent to which the agency uses methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate
to agency divisions and the corresponding research questions being addressed, including an
appropriate combination of formative and summative evaluation research and analysis approaches.
We use rigorous methods and combinations of methods that are appropriate to agency divisions and
the corresponding research questions being addressed, including an appropriate combination of
formative and summative evaluation research and analysis approaches. We have extensive
experience developing, implementing, and analyzing surveys, as well as analyzing survey data from
other sources, to support our evidence-building activities. When we need additional information before
implementing a large-scale demonstration project or new program, we conduct formative evaluations to
determine whether the project or program is feasible, appropriate, and acceptable. Our research and
demonstration projects use an appropriate combination of evaluation methods, including both process
evaluations to evaluate whether the program or policy change is being implemented as intended, and
impact evaluations to estimate the effect of the change on specific outcomes. We conduct process and
outcome evaluations of our programs on a regular basis, and we use evaluation methods that are
rigorous, well-documented, and appropriate.
Social Security Administration
16
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
We have extensive experience supporting and analyzing survey data from other sources, as well as
developing and fielding our own surveys to support evidence-building activities. Below, we provide
several examples of the surveys we used for evidence-building purposes.
We use survey data from the Understanding America Study to build an evidence base on the public's
service delivery preferences, as well as knowledge of the OASI, DI, and SSI programs.
We conduct our own surveys to build evidence on the public's service delivery preferences, their
internet use preferences, and their satisfaction with the services that we deliver online, in our field
offices, and by our teleservice centers.
We are planning to conduct a Disability Perceptions Survey to gather information on knowledge,
perceptions, and opinions working adults have about the disability programs.
We have extensive experience conducting formative evaluations, and our evaluation policy explicitly
encourages the use of formative evaluations when appropriate. Below, we provide several examples of
our formative evaluations.
We designed and conducted the Benefit Offset Pilot Demonstration (BOPD) to test the feasibility of a
national demonstration providing a $1 reduction in DI benefits for every $2 in earnings, in
combination with employment supports.
As recommended by one of our Technical Evaluation Panels (TEP), we are conducting the Beyond
Benefits Study to collect information about the service, medical, and employment needs of a study
population consisting of disability beneficiaries who are likely to exit the DI or SSI programs due to a
medical CDR. The study will also involve small-scale motivational interviewing to gain more insight
about their needs and barriers with respect to promoting sustained and substantial work activity
leading to self-sufficiency among this population. We expect the results of the study will provide
evidence on the feasibility of program improvements and innovations that may help the study
population return to work and become self-sufficient and provide policymakers an evidentiary base
from which to consider changes to the DI or SSI programs.
We are collaborating with the Department of Labor (DOL) on the RETAIN project, which includes a
first phase that is a formative evaluation of ways to improve the early coordination of health care
and employment-related supports and services, train health care providers in occupational best
practices, and facilitate communication and return-to-work efforts between workers, their
employers, and their health care providers. Based on findings from the formative evaluation, we will
fund a second phase to expand and implement the strategies that have the most potential to
increase employment and reduce future reliance on our disability programs.
We use randomized controlled trial (RCT) designs, when appropriate, to test policy changes.
Information on our demonstrations projects that use RCT designs is available in our annual report to
Congress, which is available to the public here: https://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/demos.htm.
Below, we provide examples of some of our program evaluations that are RCTs.
The Promoting Readiness of Minors in SSI (PROMISE) demonstration project tests whether
interventions that improve the health, education, and post-school outcomes of children who receive
SSI results in long-term reductions in the children's reliance on SSI. The evaluation of PROMISE
includes a process evaluation on how the programs were implemented and operated, an impact
evaluation based on an RCT that estimates the effects on youth and family outcomes, and an
analysis of the cost-effectiveness of the PROMISE projects.
The Supported Employment Demonstration (SED) evaluates whether offering evidence-based
packages of vocational, medical, and mental health services to recently denied DI and SSI
applicants (ages 18 to 50 with a mental impairment) can reduce the demand for DI benefits. The
Social Security Administration
17
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
SED evaluation uses an RCT design to estimate the impact of SED on outcomes, and it includes
process evaluation and a cost-benefit analysis.
The Promoting Opportunity Demonstration (POD) tests the effects of reducing the DI benefit amount by
$1 for every $2 that a beneficiary earns above a threshold below the level of Substantial Gainful
Activity along with simplified work incentives, on employment, benefits paid, and the DI Trust Fund.
This demonstration uses an RCT design for the impact evaluation and includes a process
evaluation, participation evaluation, and cost-benefit analyses.
We use appropriate methods for our other evaluations, which are reviewed and assessed by external
organizations. For example, OCACT describes the methods used for their assessment of the status of
the OASI and DI Trust Funds, as well as their assessment of the SSI program on our website:
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/pubs.html. An external auditing firm, working with our Office of the Inspector
General, conducts an annual review and assessment of the methods and assumptions that OCACT
uses for the Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal
Disability Insurance Trust Funds. In addition, once every four years, the Social Security Advisory Board
commissions an expert technical panel on the methods and assumptions used for the Annual Report of
the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds
(https://www.ssab.gov/research/2019-technical-panel-on-assumptions-and-methods-a-report-to-the-
board/). The panel reviews and provides recommendations on the report. The publicly available
documentation and extensive external reviews help to ensure that the methods and assumptions
OCACT uses for their reports are rigorous, well documented, and appropriate.
Following leading industry best practices, OARO uses a wide variety of internal controls to ensure that
its analytical work and any accompanying analysis is complete, accurate, reliable, and performed in
accordance with industry analytical standards. In all of OARO's analytical work, these standards
include rigorous validation and testing of all programs used to extract, process, and analyze data,
technical peer review of data development of analysis, and the development and maintenance of
technical documentation that details sources, methods, and procedures used in conducting our
analytical work. External auditors and oversight organizations routinely review our policies, procedures,
and methodologies for conducting such work. These reviews consistently find that OARO is operating
within the Federal Agency internal control standards and guidelines pertaining to policies and
procedures that govern the performance of analytical work.
5
EVALUATION, RESEARCH, STATISTICS, AND DATA ANALYSIS CAPACITY
PRESENT WITHIN THE AGENCY
The extent to which evaluation and research capacity is present within the agency to include
personnel and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities,
disseminating best practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and feedback.
We continually monitor our personnel involved in implementing evaluations, research, statistics, and
data analysis activities, as well as disseminating the results of such activities, and we hire and train
employees to maintain a sufficient capacity. Our capacity includes external resources to supplement
and support our personnel on these activities. The external resources include research and evaluation
expertise from our RDRC centers (Boston College, NBER, University of Michigan, and University of
Wisconsin-Madison), the National Academy of Science, a Blanket Purchase Order Agreement for Time
Sensitive Research Projects, the Interventional Cooperative Agreement Program (ICAP), and private
contractors.
Social Security Administration
18
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
In addition, we have built an evidence-building infrastructure that enhances our capacity. Our
infrastructure, as well as our efforts to further develop it, are described below.
Planning and Implementation Evaluation Infrastructure
Our Research and Demonstration Project Guidebook provides agency employees with information
on agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation activities. The Government
Accountability Office (GAO) reviewed our guidebook and determined that it was consistent with
research practices and GAO standards and that the guidebook addressed GAO recommendations
regarding coordinating with internal and external stakeholders as we implement evaluations. We
are currently reassessing our guidebook against guidance outlined in OMB memorandum M-20-12
and will use the results to make necessary revisions. In the interim, we are communicating
changes in evaluation strategies and practices throughout the agency through regular meetings
with staff.
We developed an Agency Evaluation Policy consistent with OMB guidance in M-20-12 that outlines
the standards the agency will use when planning and implementing evaluation activities. We
developed the policy with input from our other offices that have expertise in this area, and we
distributed the policy to all Deputy Commissioner level offices for their review and concurrence. We
posted the policy on our website: https://www.ssa.gov/data.
As part of our planning and implementation of evaluation activities, all of our offices that conduct
evaluations develop project plans that pre-specify evaluation activities. These plans help to ensure
that our evaluations meet the standards identified in our Agency Evaluation Policy and contribute to
keeping the evaluations within scope.
We use Technical Expert Panels (TEPs) when necessary to obtain guidance on policy,
implementation, and evaluation issues. The TEPs highlight potential barriers to success and
suggest alternative strategies to improve upon the original proposals. The reports are available to
the public on our website: https://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/demos.htm.
We conducted a project to identify lessons learned from planning and implementing evaluations of
our major demonstration projects. This project included evaluation experts from academia and the
private sector who reviewed our prior demonstration projects and provided insights on how we can
apply lessons learned to inform the design and implementation of future evaluations. The results
from this project will advance our efforts to conduct rigorous evaluation and evidence-building
activities.
Dissemination of Best Practices Infrastructure
We have a Contracting Officer's Representative (COR) Workgroup that shares best practices on
developing and managing research and evaluation contracts. This community of practice shares
guidance on topics such as developing a Statement of Work and Independent Government Cost
Estimates, as well as tips for ongoing project management.
Our Business Intelligence Competency Center (BICC) is a collaborative structure and community for
sharing business intelligence activities, applications, tools, and best practices across the agency.
We define business intelligence as the process for using a standardized set of tools and techniques
to turn broad raw data into meaningful information to drive decision-making, optimize performance,
and improve stewardship. The BICC also provides guidance to implement the agency's BI strategy
and the Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) initiative.
Social Security Administration
19
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Our Analytics Center of Excellence (ACE) organizes the Data Science Technology Exchange, which is a
series of training seminars on various data science topics. The ACE team identifies the topics and
presenters for these seminars, organizes the seminars, and our Office of Learning records videos of
these seminars so that our employees can access them at any time.
Infrastructure for Dissemination of Findings by SSA
Our internet site (www.ssa.gov) provides the public with access to information on our evaluation
activities. Our evaluation findings are found in our Annual Performance Report
(https://www.ssa.gov/agency/budget-and-performance.html); our disability research site
(https://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/);our actuarial resources site (https://www.ssa.gov/oact/);
and our research, statistics, and policy analysis site (https://www.ssa.gov/policy/).
Our Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics (ORES) publishes on a quarterly basis the
Social Security Bulletin, which contains research and evaluation articles related to retirement
programs, disability programs, and means-tested programs, including the programs we administer.
The Bulletin has a diverse readership of policymakers, government officials, academics, graduate
and undergraduate students, business people, and other interested parties.
ORES, as an OMB designated statistical unit, publishes data and statistics on programs
administered by the Social Security Administration-the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability
Insurance program and Supplemental Security Income program. Our flagship statistical publication
the Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin has been published annually since
1940. The data in the Supplement and our other statistical publications provide a base for
research, policy analysis, and proposals for changing the programs.
Our employees publish findings in leading professional journals, present findings at professional
forums, and present findings to our external stakeholders including Congress, the Social Security
Advisory Board, OMB, and other Federal agencies. ORDP and the Office of Communications
worked with our Chief Actuary to use social media to communicate findings from the Annual Report of
the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust
Funds.
Infrastructure for the Dissemination of Findings by External Organizations
One of the primary functions of our four Retirement and Disability Research Consortium (RDRC)
centers-Boston College, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), the University of
Michigan, and the University of Wisconsin-Madison-is to disseminate information on research and
evaluations related to Social Security programs to policymakers, researchers, stakeholder
organizations, and the general public.
The Department of Labor's (DOL) Clearinghouse for Labor Evaluation and Research (CLEAR), which
reviews studies in a variety of labor-related topic areas that are determined in collaboration with the
DOL Chief Evaluation Office and DOL agency staff, disseminates findings from several of our
evaluations. The vast majority of our evaluations included in CLEAR received a causal evidence
rating of "high causal evidence", indicating that DOL is confident that the estimated effects from our
evaluations are solely attributable to the intervention examined.
Social Security Administration
20
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Infrastructure for Incorporating Employee Views and Feedback
Our employees review and provide feedback on: (1) research and evaluation technical proposals
from contractors, (2) grant proposals from the RDRC centers and other entities, and (3) the annual
RDRC research agenda.
Our employees identify topics, research and evaluations, and provide input into the content of our
Learning Agenda, our Evaluation Plan, our Evaluation Policy, and other research and evaluation
studies.
We incorporate our employees' views and feedback into our annual extramural research plan that
we submit as part of the annual budget process.
We have an internal peer review process for our research and evaluation activities, during which
employees participate with external scholars to review and provide feedback on research and
evaluation reports before we consider them ready for dissemination.
6
DEVELOP EVALUATION, RESEARCH, STATISTICS, AND DATA ANALYSIS
CAPACITY
The extent to which the agency has the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to
develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-
day operations.
We continually monitor our capacity to assist agency staff and program offices to develop the capacity
to use evaluation, research, statistics, and data analysis in the day-to-day operations, and we make the
necessary investments to ensure we have sufficient capacity in this area. While most of our offices
need to evaluate policies and programs to some extent, they generally rely on our offices with
significant expertise in supporting other divisions with using evaluation, research, statistics, and data
analysis approaches in day-to-day operations. Below, we describe our major offices with this capacity
and how they assist agency staff and program offices to develop the capacity to use evaluation
research and analysis approaches in day-to-day operations.
ORDP is the agency lead for implementing the Evidence Act. Our designated Evaluation Officer
and Statistical Official have leadership positions within ORDP, and played an active role working
with other major offices to identify their research and evaluation needs, and to incorporate them into
our Learning Agenda and Annual Evaluation Plan. ORDP has also developed a new senior-level
position of Chief Research Officer who is working with the Evaluation Officer to develop and
implement the Learning Agenda and Evaluation Plan. The Evaluation Officer and Chief Research
Officer developed an agency-wide Evaluation Policy, and actively promote the policy to other
divisions within the agency. The Evaluation Officer encourages other divisions within the agency to
participate in training sessions and presentations on research and evaluation topics offered by the
Evidence Team within the Office of Management and Budget, the Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology, the Committee on National Statistics, and other organizations. In addition, ORDP
oversees our Contracting Officer's Representative (COR) Workgroup. The primary offices within ORDP
with the capacity to assist agency staff and program offices with using evaluation, research,
statistics, and data analysis approaches in the day-to-day operations are: the Office of Research,
Evaluation, and Statistics (ORES); the Office of Research, Demonstration, and Employment
Support (ORDES); and the Office of Disability Policy (ODP).
ORES, as an OMB designated statistical unit under the Confidential Information Protection and
Social Security Administration
21
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA), has responsibilities for producing and disseminating core
statistical products and research datasets from administrative records and other sources to serve
the needs of SSA components and key external stakeholders. These statistical and data products
support and inform organizational learning and program management.
The ORES Associate Commissioner serves as SSA's Statistical Official as required by the
Evidence Act, and she provides advice to our various divisions on statistical policy, techniques, and
procedures as part of our efforts to develop agency-wide capacity to use appropriate statistical
approaches and data in our day-to-day operations. Our Statistical Official coordinates the RDRC
Research-in-Progress Seminar Series where RDRC researchers present their findings. The seminar
series is open to employees across the agency and attendance has grown significantly over the
years. She also coordinates an Annual RDRC Research Conference that is open to our employees and
to external stakeholders. Both events are specifically aimed at highlighting key research and
analysis findings relevant to our various divisions and are an important component of our efforts to
assist agency staff and program offices to use evaluation, research, statistics, and data analysis in
the day-to-day operations. We monitor our capacity to fulfill our responsibilities as a designated
statistical unit, and we make requests for staff and resources when we have well-justified needs. As
we implement the requirements for statistical units under Title III of the Evidence Act, we will
reassess our needs and request the necessary resources to carry out our responsibilities.
OARO has a primary role in implementing the Evidence Act and the Federal Data Strategy Action
Plan. Our designated Chief Data Officer has a leadership position within OARO and is working with
our other designated officials to complete the requirements within the Evidence Act. OARO directly
supports the agency's mission, goals, and service principles by reviewing program quality and
effectiveness; making recommendations for program improvement using feedback from the
adjudication of cases, predictive modeling, and advanced data analysis; coordinating the agency's
detection and prevention of fraud; and responding to recommendations of external monitoring
authorities. OARO leads our Business Intelligence Competency Center and our Analytics Center of
Excellence. Both centers assist agency staff and program offices to develop the capacity to use
evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-day operations. There are four
offices within OARO that work with agency staff and program offices to develop the capacity to use
evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in the day-to-day operations, including: the
Office of Analytics and Improvements (OAI), the Office of Appellate Operations (OAO), the Office of
Quality Review (OQR), and the Office of Program Integrity (OPI).
OCACT plays a primary role in evaluating the financial status of the OASI, DI, and SSI programs
under current law, and how proposed changes to the programs will affect the programs' financial
status. For example, OCACT supports our various divisions, Congress, and the Administration by
assessing the effects of proposed legislative changes and proposed regulations. OCACT provides
our various offices expert consultation on the design and implementation of research and evaluation
projects. OCACT also conducts extensive research and analysis that the Commissioner and the
Board of Trustees use by as the foundation for the Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the
Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds, and it leads the
inter-component work on the Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program. OCACT
makes important contributions to other regular evaluations that the agency conducts for Congress
and other external stakeholders.
os plays a major role in implementing the Evidence Act and the Federal Data Strategy, and it
assists agency staff and program offices to develop the capacity to use evaluation research and
analysis approaches and data in the day-to-day operations. One of their major contributions is the
development and expansion of our Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW), which provides our staff and
Social Security Administration
22
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
program offices with access to our data, as well as the infrastructure to perform advanced analytics.
The EDW provides the foundation for our research, evaluation, and data analysis activities.
OS also oversees our Advanced Data Analytics Lab (ADAL). ADAL staff use our master data files to
conduct advance data analytics for many of our major offices. The results of ADAL analyses are
often used as input in senior executive decisions and actions. ADAL services include program
evaluation, policy evaluation, predictive analytics, descriptive analytics, data quality analysis,
prototyping new technologies, and machine learning exercises.
We are committed to hiring and developing staff with the specialized knowledge and skills needed to
conduct rigorous research and evaluations. We provide our employees with training opportunities to
develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches and data in our day-to-day
operations. For example, our employees participated in, or are scheduled to participate in, the
following training.
The Joint Program on Survey Methodology's Big Data for Social Science course that OMB arranged
with the University of Maryland, which covers the key big data tools in a non-intimidating way to
social and data scientists.
The Evaluation and Evidence Training Series hosted by OMB and the Office of Evaluation Sciences
within the General Services Administration.
The Federal Data Science Pilot Training Program hosted by the Chief Information Officer Council and
is
designed to assist agencies in filling a critical skills gap by training current Federal employees in
emerging data science skills.
Courses from Claremont Graduate University's The Evaluators' Institute, which offers a variety of
courses that, provide evaluators with the capacity that they need to conduct high quality
evaluations.
As we expand our evidence-building activities, we are seeking new training opportunities for all of our
employees. For example, we are exploring training opportunities for our senior executives that can
help them better understand the results of our evaluations and use data and research more effectively
in managing our programs. We are exploring additional training opportunities for our technical staff that
will allow them to enhance their expertise on evaluation methods and research techniques. Finally, we
are exploring training opportunities for our non-technical staff so that they will better understand the
importance of evaluations for supporting evidence-based policymaking.
Social Security Administration
23
FY 2022 - 2026 Capacity Assessment
Securing today
and tomorrow
SSA.gov
in
Social Security Administration
February 2022
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 Documentation
Produced and published at U.S. taxpayer expense
