U.S. Department of the Treasury
Interim Evaluation Policy
1789
Background. The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-435, "Evidence
Act") requires that agencies publish an evaluation policy. This policy will apply to all evaluation activities within
Treasury, including those led by bureaus and Departmental Offices. This document is Treasury's Interim
Evaluation Policy and includes the guiding principles and quality standards that should be followed when
conducting evaluation activities within the Department.
Guiding Principles.
Rigor: Evaluations conducted by Treasury will be based on verifiable data and information that meets
rigorous standards, such as those used by professional evaluation organizations. This standard extends to the
effective management of qualitative and quantitative data, and significant evaluations should include
consultation with the Evaluation Officer, the Statistical Official, the Chief Data Officer, and other relevant
officials.
Relevance and Utility: The Evaluation Officer and those conducting or leading program evaluations should
select evaluation activities that align with program priorities and maximize influence on priority outcomes.
Evaluations should inform program or strategic decisions by providing evidence that will help the agency
better achieve strategic objectives, core mission, and/or operational excellence. Further, the relevance and
utility of completed evaluations should be assessed when practicable to inform future decision-making.
Transparency: Evaluations should appropriately engage policymakers, program managers, and the public. The
objectives, definitions of success, evaluation findings, and evaluation methods should be communicated to
key stakeholders in contextually appropriate ways throughout the evaluation lifecycle (from selection to
design to findings).
Independence: Evaluations will be overseen by staff or leadership with appropriate evaluation training and
expertise to make decisions about and approve evaluation design and methods. The Evaluation Officer will
be empowered to protect the independence and objectivity of all evaluation activity. Evaluations will be
conducted in a manner that engages stakeholders while preserving the real and perceived independence of the
Evaluation Officer and those conducting the evaluations.
Ethics: Evaluations will safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and privacy of the participants and other
stakeholders and affected entities, and adhere to Federal Data Strategy Data Ethics Guidelines and other
relevant requirements and professional standards.
Quality Standards.
Evaluation teams have appropriate methodological and subject matter expertise
A written evaluation design is completed that:
Clearly defines objectives and aligns objectives to program, office, bureau, or Treasury priorities
Outlines key questions, methods, and data collection and analysis plans
Identifies and assesses roles of key stakeholders, partners, and target audiences
Prior to beginning an evaluation, evaluators conduct a preliminary assessment of data availability and quality,
methodological deficits, and expected results
Evaluation findings are presented in the following manner:
Findings are concise, written in plain language, and supported by quantitative data
Findings are presented alongside the initial written design
Evaluators address replicability of data collection and analysis methods to the maximum extent
possible
Findings are disseminated in contextually appropriate ways to policymakers, regulators, and the
public
Post-evaluation action plans include an assessment of the evaluation process, findings, lessons learned, a set
of possible explanations for counterintuitive findings, and a list of actionable items to inform management
decisions
