Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
FY 2022-2026 Department of the Treasury
Learning Agenda
Table of Contents
What is a Learning Agenda?
2
Background
2
Approach to Developing Treasury's Learning Agenda
2
Linking to Other Learning and Planning Processes
3
Section 1: Overview of Treasury's Learning Agenda
4
Section 2: Planned Activities for Implementing the Learning Agenda
8
Background
8
Goal 1: Equitable Economic Growth and Recovery
8
Goal 2: Enhance National Security
13
Goal 3: Protect Financial Stability and Resiliency
14
Goal 4: Combat Climate Change
15
Goal 5: Modernize Treasury Operations
16
1
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
What is a Learning Agenda?
Background
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 ("Evidence Act") requires agencies to
develop an evidence-building plan every four years as part of the agency strategic plan. Referred to as a
learning agenda, this plan identifies the priority questions that, if addressed, will build evidence useful to
improving the administration and outcomes of the programs, policies, and regulations of an agency. The
learning agenda must identify the agency's planned activities to answer these questions as well as the
data, methods, and analytical approaches that the agency may use to develop evidence and support
policymaking. In the learning agenda, agencies must also address anticipated challenges to building
evidence and proposed solutions to those challenges.
Approach to Developing Treasury's Learning Agenda
As part of developing the FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan, Treasury stakeholders identified priority questions
aligned to strategic objectives where the Department wishes to strategically build evidence through research,
evaluation, statistics, and analysis to inform decision-making (see Section 1 for an overview of the questions).
The Department engaged over 200 stakeholders, including policy, program, and management officials,
subject matter experts, and senior leaders, in drafting the plan. Learning agenda questions, along with other
strategic plan content, were vetted through bureau and office planning teams, bureau heads, policy office
leadership, and other key accountable officials including members of Treasury's Data Governance Board.
In addition, Treasury conducted targeted outreach to external stakeholder groups through its strategic plan
public engagement efforts to understand how the Department can better strengthen its partnership with the
public in implementing equitable economic growth and recovery, financial stability, and climate priorities. Of
the more than 150 comments received, over a third recommended that Treasury engage more actively with
community-based organizations. Specifically, commenters recommended Treasury increase outreach efforts
to improve the access of Treasury programs and opportunities in communities that are disproportionately
impacted by economic and environmental inequities. The feedback emphasized a need for Treasury to focus
on partnering with trusted community organizations to advance equity in access to financial services and
recovery program funds, climate initiatives, and overall customer experience. Responses to OMB's Equity
Request for Information¹ further underscored these recommendations and highlighted the need for
improved data collection, disaggregation, and data sharing across the federal government. These
recommendations informed the planning and prioritization of the implementation of the learning agenda
(see Section 2), particularly for questions and activities around taxpayer experience (Treasury Objective 1.1),
recovery programs (Treasury Objectives 1.3 and 1.4), climate initiatives (Treasury Objective 4.2), and data
(Treasury Objective 5.3).
Finally, Treasury considered the results of surveys, outreach, and other issue-specific external stakeholder
engagement efforts led by bureaus and offices in the development of the learning agenda questions. For
example, the IRS developed a bureau-level learning agenda (which informed the Treasury learning agenda)
using information from external customer survey data, Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration
(TIGTA) reports on IRS operations and processes, and Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) Most Serious
Problems documentation. The Office of Recovery Programs (ORP) engaged with federal government
1 In 2021, as part of efforts to identify methods for assessing and advancing equity through the Federal
government, OMB issued a Request for Information (RFI) to seek input, information, and recommendations from
a
broad array of stakeholders on available methods, approaches, and tools to assess whether agency policies and
actions equitable serve all individuals and communities, particularly those
2
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
partners, recipient and grantees, and advocacy groups to inform program design, develop guidance for
reporting, promote equity in program implementation, and inform evaluation opportunities. As part of the
annual learning agenda update process, Treasury intends to seek input from external stakeholders, including
recipient and grantees of Treasury programs, non-governmental researchers, and the communities and
individuals the Department serves.
The planned activities described in Section 2 are primarily focused on FY 2022 and FY 2023 and do not
encompass all ongoing evidence-building activities within the Department's bureaus and offices. As Treasury
matures its evidence-building capacity, strengthens enterprise-wide coordination of evidence and evaluation
activities, and builds foundational evidence for each of the priority questions, the learning agenda will be
updated to include additional planned activities and further discussions on related data, methods, and
analytical approaches used for answering these questions. Treasury will continue to engage with the
Department's evidence community, federal partners, and external researchers and evaluators to identify
additional resources and opportunities to answer the questions in the learning agenda.
Linking to Other Learning and Planning Processes
Within Treasury, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the Bureau of the Fiscal Service (Fiscal) have
developed learning agendas in alignment to their bureau-level priorities and the Treasury Strategic Plan and
Learning Agenda. Additionally, Treasury's Office of Recovery Programs (ORP) intends to develop a learning
agenda that complements the Treasury Strategic Plan and their program needs. Other Treasury offices and
bureaus, including the Office of Economic Policy, Office of Tax Policy, and Office of Financial Research,
conduct extensive research and analysis activities as their core mission and will be key partners in
implementing Treasury's Learning Agenda.
Where possible, this learning agenda identifies opportunities to partner with other agencies to develop
evidence in support of shared priorities, such as working with the Department of Housing and Urban
Development to understand the impact of emergency rental and mortgage assistance programs on housing
stability. Further, we identify areas clearly aligned with efforts underway led by the White House and Office
of Management and Budget (OMB), including the draft President's Management Agenda (PMA) learning
agenda, released by OMB for public input in December 2021, and the American Rescue Plan (ARP) Equity
Learning Agenda. Several of the questions on the draft PMA learning agenda align with Treasury priorities,
including questions focused on advancing equity (Treasury Objective 1.3), strengthening the Federal
workforce (Treasury Objective 5.1), and improving customer experience (Treasury Objective 5.4).
3
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
Section 1: Overview of Treasury's Learning Agenda
Treasury's mission is to maintain a strong economy by promoting conditions that enable equitable and
sustainable economic growth at home and abroad, combating threats to, and protecting the integrity of
the financial system, and managing the U.S. government's finances and resources effectively. For FY
2022-2026, Treasury has identified five goals and 19 objectives to advance this mission consistent with
the Biden-Harris Administration's priorities and values.
Treasury's FY 2022-2026, Strategic Goals:
1. Promoting equitable economic growth and recovery: We will address systemic issues in the
financial system, strengthen economic resiliency for all Americans, and partner internationally
to advance equitable global recovery and sustainable growth.
2. Enhancing national security: As foreign and domestic actors threaten American economic and
national security, we will strengthen bi-lateral and multi-lateral partnerships to defeat these
threats and take a leading role in protecting the U.S. and international financial systems from
abuse.
3. Protecting financial stability and resiliency: To improve financial resiliency ahead of the next
inevitable crisis and reduce associated costs to the economy, we will address vulnerabilities in
core financial markets through responsible regulatory reforms.
4. Combatting climate change: We will work alongside our domestic and international partners to
respond ambitiously to tackle the challenges of climate change, adapt to an already changing
climate, mitigate the risks, and position the global economy for clean and sustainable growth.
5. Modernizing Treasury operations: We will focus on a set of enterprise-level improvements to
improve mission delivery across Treasury, including building and retaining a workforce that
represents the diverse people and communities the Department serves, enabling work routines
of the future to respond to lessons learned from the pandemic work environment,
strengthening decision-making through improved use of data, and increasing trust in
government by building consistent customer experiences.
This table on the following page lists all 31 questions identified in the Treasury FY 2022-2026 Strategic
Plan as the priority questions to address each strategic objective under these five goals. The table also
notes where questions may be aligned to other learning agendas and where no activities are currently
planned. Treasury intends to explore additional opportunities to partner with other agencies and
identify additional resources to fund evidence-building activities in support of these questions.
4
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
Strategic Objective
Learning Agenda question
Planned Activities?
1.1 Tax
How can the IRS/TTB address taxpayer needs and
Planned activities
Administration and
preferences to deliver a better taxpayer experience?
described in Section 2
Policy
How can the IRS/TTB simplify interactions for taxpayers,
No projects identified;
such as providing more self-service options, improving
anticipated alignment
processes for filing, responding to audit notices or
with PMA learning agenda
examinations, correcting returns, and remitting payments?
How can the IRS/TTB use information reporting, artificial
Planned activities
intelligence, data, and advanced analytic techniques to
described in Section 2
reduce the tax gap, improve compliance, and diminish
repeat noncompliance?
To what extent do barriers and bias in the tax code prevent
Planned activities
equity and fairness in the administration and enforcement of
described in Section 2;
the tax code and access to direct payments?
anticipated alignment
with PMA and ARP Equity
Learning Agendas
1.3 Economically
To what extent are American Rescue Plan (ARP) programs
Planned activities
Resilient
being implemented equitably?
described in Section 2;
Communities
What is the impact and/or outcomes of ARP programs on
anticipated alignment
households, businesses, and governments?
with ARP Equity Learning
Agenda
What are the impacts and/or outcomes of the Emergency
Planned activities
Capital Investment Program, Rapid Response Program, and
described in Section 2
Minority Lending Programs on Community Financial
Development Institutions (CDFIs) or minority depository
institutions (MDIs)?
How does the CDFI Fund impact and boost investments in
No projects identified
low-income communities in the long term, including
Persistent Poverty Counties?
1.4 Resilient Housing
What strategies deployed in the recovery from COVID-19
Planned activities
Market
best prevented evictions and foreclosures? How can we
described in Section 2;
track evictions nationwide?
anticipated alignment
with ARP Equity and HUD
Learning Agendas
What are strategies to reduce the cost of production or
No projects identified for
preservation of affordable housing while still making it high
FY22-23; anticipated
quality and resilient to climate change?
alignment with HUD
Learning Agenda
2.1 Cyber Resiliency
How can Treasury strengthen its situational awareness of
Planned activities
of Financial System
cybersecurity threats in the financial sector and encourage
described in Section 2
and Institutions
greater industry participation in the Office of Cybersecurity
and Critical Infrastructure Protection (OCCIP) initiatives?
2.2 Economic
What would best facilitate cross-Treasury coordination on
No projects identified
Measures to Advance
policy issues that leverages all Treasury tools and authorities
National Security
to advance national security objectives?
5
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
Strategic Objective
Learning Agenda question
Planned Activities?
2.3 Modernizing
How can Treasury best measure the effectiveness of its
Planned activities
Sanctions Regime
sanctions policies and leverage those insights to design and
described in Section 2
implement effective sanctions policies in the future?
2.4 Transparency in
How will developments in digital assets and other Fintech
No projects identified
the Financial System
innovations affect illicit finance threats?
3.1 Financial System
To what extent did nonbank financial firms and activities
No projects identified
Vulnerabilities
contribute to market stress in March 2020?
What additional data and analytical methods could be used
No projects identified
to improve the monitoring of cyclical vulnerabilities?
3.2 Resilient
How can Treasury improve its analysis of evolving securities
No projects identified
securities markets
markets, and how should it consider various tradeoffs when
making recommendations to improve their resiliency?
3.3 Financial
How is Treasury currently using artificial intelligence,
No projects identified
innovation
machine learning models, and alternative data in financial
services (e.g., underwriting) and what further guidance,
oversight, or regulation might be necessary to enable
innovation that better serves and protects consumers?
How can Treasury improve the delivery of government
Planned activities
payments to hard-to-reach populations (e.g., unbanked)?
described in Section 2;
anticipated alignment
with PMA learning agenda
What are the risks and opportunities regarding the use of
No projects identified
technology by financial institutions (regtech) and by the
official sector (suptech) to conduct compliance and oversight
functions?
4.2 Climate
How does Treasury ensure climate policies protect
Planned activities
Incentives and
communities disproportionately impacted by climate-related described in Section 2
Investments
risk?
4.4 Sustainable
How can Treasury most effectively build capacity and
No projects identified
Treasury Operations
climate literacy for climate adaption and sustainable
operations?
Which professional communities of interest and
No projects identified
organizations should be prioritized for rebuilding climate
change expertise?
What investments does Treasury need to make to address
Planned activities
Treasury's climate vulnerabilities, and how much will it cost?
described in Section 2
5.1 Recruit and
How can Treasury increase representation with respect to its
No projects identified;
Retain a Diverse &
public-facing call-center workforce?
anticipated alignment
Inclusive Workforce
To what extent has increased diversity in management and
with PMA learning agenda
leadership positions influenced organizational performance
or improved employees' sense of inclusion?
6
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
Strategic Objective
Learning Agenda question
Planned Activities?
5.2 Future Work
How are Treasury's customers' needs changing, how are
Planned activities
Routines
employee needs changing, and how do you foster innovation
described in Section 2;
and collaboration in a hybrid organization?
anticipated alignment
with PMA learning agenda
5.3 Better Use of
How can Treasury combine its debt portfolio data with
No projects identified;
Data
disaggregated demographic data to inform equity
anticipated alignment
assessments?
with PMA learning agenda
What are ways to improve data collection, use, and sharing
in order to improve Treasury's ability to deliver services and
make programmatic and policy decisions more equitably?
5.4 Customer
What are effective strategies for serving hard to reach
No projects identified;
Experience Practices
customers, particularly those who lack access to reliable
anticipated alignment
internet, banks/financial institutions, and the credentials
with PMA learning agenda
required to verify their digital identity?
What is the right beacon metric for measuring customer
Planned activities
experience for the department?
described in Section 2
7
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
Section 2: Planned Activities for Implementing the Learning Agenda
Background
For 14 of Treasury's 31 learning agenda questions, we have identified planned activities for FY 2022 and
FY 2023, described in this section. These activities do not reflect all evidence-building activities carried
out within the Department. As Treasury matures its enterprise-wide evidence capacity, including
governance processes, the learning agenda will be updated with additional identified plans. The tables
below describe the planned activities for these prioritized questions, including high level information,
where possible, on data, methods, analytical approaches, and anticipated challenges.
Goal 1: Equitable Economic Growth and Recovery
Strategic Objective 1.1: Tax Administration and Policy
Enhance tax compliance and service; improve tax policy design.
How can the IRS/TTB address taxpayer needs and preferences to deliver a better taxpayer experience?
Lead: Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Support: Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB)
Background
The IRS seeks to improve taxpayer experience through a strategy that incorporates leading
practices of customer service and ultimately creates a proactive, convenient, seamless,
personalized, and effective interaction for taxpayers. As reflected in the 2021 Taxpayer
First Act report to Congress, the IRS has developed a six-pillar strategy for improving
taxpayer experience over the next 10 years. The IRS conducted in-depth research and
devoted months to engaging a wide array of stakeholders to develop this strategy. As the
IRS implements this strategy, it plans to continue an evidence-based approach that
includes research and analysis projects on taxpayer experiences and strengthened data
and analytics capabilities to promote an agency-wide understanding of taxpayer
experience and emerging needs and expectations.
Planned
The IRS is working to understand the most effective methods to measure taxpayer needs
Activities
and preferences and will subsequently seek to address these needs. In FY23, the IRS is
planning four projects in FY23 which are focused on establishing, baselining, and
strengthening measures of taxpayer needs and preferences to identify opportunities to
deliver a better taxpayer experience. Activities 2-4 are included in Treasury's FY 2023
Evaluation Plan.
Activity #1
Business Online Account (BOLA) Foundational Research: The IRS will analyze phone call
records, user engagement/interactions, CSAT surveys, behavioral insights, and interviews
to understand challenges business taxpayers face, and map the online account customer
journey. A challenge associated with this project is the need for a viable process for
authorizing an individual to act on behalf, and the IRS will work to address this in
developing a comprehensive BOLA product and experience. The IRS also anticipates
resource challenges to implementing improvements to the BOLA product and experience
but intends to use this research to understand which online account product features or
services would greatly improve the business taxpayer experience and prioritize
investments accordingly.
Activity #2
Taxpayer Experience Analytics: The IRS will use Natural Language Processing techniques
and machine learning to analyze customer experience data, including individual master
file, notice delivery system, online services, and survey data, to identify opportunities to
improve taxpayer experience and for process improvements. The IRS anticipates
8
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
challenges related to the pros and cons of each machine learning technique and will work
to compare techniques using common objectives and criteria. Additionally,
implementation of recommendations for process improvements would require buy-in
from multiple stakeholders and often requires changes to established processes,
procedures, and training, furthering the need for a robust evidence base prior to adopting
any recommended process improvements.
Activity #3
Customer Callback Expansion: The IRS will evaluate the effects of Customer Callback (CCB)
and opportunities to gather feedback and maximize the expanded use of CCB to improve
taxpayer experience by monitoring performance trends and measuring progress of CCB
applications deployed against IRS Modernization Plan reportable measures and industry
benchmarks for Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). Anticipated challenges include limited
implementation bandwidth and limited CCB offerings, difficulty managing parallel evolving
design applications and infrastructure upgrades, and variation in CCB acceptance based on
individual customer behavior.
Activity #4
Customer Expectation Surveys: The IRS will use surveys, focus groups, and behavioral
insights to understand current customer experience and needs and expectations of SB/SE
taxpayers and tax professionals. This will include the 2022 Customer Expectations,
Experience, and Needs (CEEN) survey for small business and self-employed taxpayers and
the 2023 Tax Professional Engagement Survey for the tax professional community.
Gathering data from a representative sample of SB/SE taxpayers and practitioners can be
challenging, meaning data gathered may need to be treated as directional and qualitative,
rather than quantitative.
How can the IRS/TTB use information reporting, artificial intelligence, data, and advanced analytic
techniques to reduce the tax gap, improve compliance, and diminish repeat noncompliance?
Lead: Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Support: Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB)
Background
Improving compliance with the tax code and reducing the tax gap, defined as the amount
of true tax liability that is not paid voluntarily and timely, are critical to the IRS's mission
and vision of enforcing the law with integrity and fairness and upholding the integrity of
the nation's tax system. The IRS seeks to take full advantage of advances in technology to
inform decision-making and improve operational outcomes. The IRS's Research, Advanced
Analytics, and Statistics (RAAS) group also coordinates with the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax
and Trade Bureau (TTB) to apply leading practices and learnings from IRS projects to TTB's
tax administration and enforcement activities.
Planned
The IRS is planning four projects in FY23 which will involve using new data or analytic
Activities
advances to identify emerging noncompliance issues and address the tax gap.
Activity #1
Negative Capital Accounts Validation: The IRS will build a dataset using existing e-filed
partnership returns to investigate negative capital accounts. The IRS will build a dataset
with partnership information and use the dataset to look at partnerships in a holistic way.
Activities will focus on understanding how the IRS can use available data to better
understand partnership, estimate a partner's outside basis and at-risk amount, and
enhance partnership workload selection for Small Business/Self-Employed (SB/SE) and
Large Business & International (LB&I) division audits. Anticipated challenges include
managing and analyzing data which may be difficult to separate, merge, and reconcile,
which may contribute to difficulty distinguishing legitimate from illegitimate negative
capital accounts using the return data alone.
9
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
Return Preparer Scoring Model: The IRS will explore opportunities to develop a model to
sort return preparers into different treatment streams and rank preparers for
egregiousness within treatment streams. The IRS will use the return preparer database
and preparer-level data and unsupervised soft clustering approaches to find meaningful
and interpretable preparer clusters. The IRS anticipates difficulty producing interpretable
results and reaching conclusions due to varying standards of egregiousness and the size of
treatment streams.
Big Data Analytics and IRS Criminal Investigation: The IRS will explore opportunities to use
Big Data Analytics and artificial intelligence to improve selection of potential criminal
cases, drive field office level criminal tax case selection strategies, and drive other
actionable insights. Challenges to this project include identifying, obtaining, staging, and
integrating the necessary and appropriate datasets, including external data sources, and
assessing model fairness, bias, and disparate impact. The IRS will also work to determine
the appropriate way of communicating the insights from the project.
Exempt Organization Noncompliance Initiative: The IRS will leverage existing data sources
and data provided to other agencies (including Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) filed with
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), Small Business Administration (SBA)
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loan information, and data from pay.gov) to explore
opportunities to use analytic approaches and tools to identify fraud in the exempt
organization space and identify lessons learned to further refine its approach. Anticipated
challenges include coordination and communication between IRS divisions, data
limitations, data storage and access, and employee resources and expertise.
Are there barriers and bias in the tax code that prevent equity and fairness in administration and
enforcement of the tax code or access to direct payments?
Lead: Departmental Offices (Office of Tax Policy)
Support: Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Background
In 2020 and 2021, the Treasury Department, the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, and the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) rapidly sent out three rounds of direct relief payments
during the COVID-19 crisis, and payments from the third round continue to be disbursed to
Americans. These stimulus payments provided Americans with relief from the pandemic,
putting money directly into their bank accounts so that they can pay bills, put food on
their tables, and otherwise provide for their families. Most of the EIPs were provided
automatically to those whose eligibility could be determined using tax return information
from prior years. But this strategy alone would have left out millions of Americans because
many lower-income individuals-amon whom people of color are disproportionately
represented-ar not required to file tax returns. To address this challenge, Treasury and
the IRS partnered with other federal agencies and community organizations-and
conducted significant outreach-ultimately making more than 26 million payments to
those who did not file tax returns in 2019 or 2020.
Planned
Treasury's Office of Tax Policy (OTP), with support from the IRS Research, Applied
Activities
Analytics and Statistics (RAAS) Division, is examining whether and how eligible adults and
families received an Economic Impact Payment (EIP), and is estimating equity impacts of a
letter campaign about such payments. Once this work is completed, OTP plan to publish
statistics on the composition of EIP recipients, including estimates of race and ethnicity
and other demographic characteristics. As with all research using tax data, this report will
carefully follow long-standing data protection protocols to prevent disclosure of taxpayer
10
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
information. OTP hopes to have results on the first and second round of EIPs in 2022, with
results on the third round in 2023.
Strategic Objective 1.3: Economically Resilient Communities
Promote equitable financial recovery and growth through support and flow of capital to small businesses,
industry, households, and communities.
To what extent are American Rescue Plan (ARP) programs being implemented equitably? What is the
impact of ARP programs on households, businesses, and governments?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Recovery Programs (ORP)
Support: Departmental Offices: Office of Economic Policy (EP)
Background
Treasury is currently engaging with internal and external stakeholders for ORP programs to
understand the most relevant and urgent questions around topics including federal
emergency program stand-up, promoting equity at the state and local government level,
and maximizing program outcomes while mitigating barriers to access and undue burden
on program participants. The ORP Learning Agenda will include questions focused on
specific programs authorized by the American Rescue Plan (ARP), the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of Fiscal Year 2021, and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act, as well as questions about the broader impact of recovery programs
that will generate evidence to inform future economic recovery and growth efforts.
Further, the ARP Implementation Team is developing an ARP Equity Learning Agenda,
which provides an overarching framework to guide the understanding of ARP investments
on questions of equity, including Treasury questions.
Planned
In FY22 and FY23, Treasury intends to conduct initial descriptive analyses to understand
Activities
the geographic and demographic distribution of funds. Treasury is working to identify and
prioritize evaluation questions for each program, including questions such as:
How equitable was the distribution of program funds?
What are the effects of funds on priority outcomes?
How did technical assistance and outreach efforts affect program implementation
and equity in distribution of funds?
In addition to program-specific questions, Treasury is interested in looking across recovery
programs to understand how funds overlapped in certain areas or how programs may have
interacted to contribute to priority outcomes. Treasury will examine how the Department's
levers or tools can incentivize grantees to focus on the priority efforts of 1) ensuring funds
are allocated to communities with the most demonstrated needs and 2) removing barriers
to receiving the funds for low-income communities and communities of color.
The Office of Economic Policy (EP) is responsible for analyzing and reporting on current and
prospective economic developments in the U.S. economy and assisting in the
determination of appropriate economic policies. Since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic, EP has conducted evaluations, analysis, and research to develop evidence and
inform decision-making for recovery programs. In FY 2022 and FY 2023, EP will conduct
descriptive and impact evaluations to answer the questions identified above. Additionally,
Treasury is working with the General Services Administration (GSA)'s Office of Evaluation
Sciences to identify potential evaluations to answer short-, medium-, and long-term
priority questions. Treasury is also exploring opportunities to leverage Federal resources
(including the ARP National Evaluation contract) and to partner with external researchers
11
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
to evaluate the impact of ARP programs by answering the questions included above, in the
ORP Learning Agenda, and the ARP Equity Learning Agenda.
What are the impacts and/or outcomes of the Emergency Capital Investment Program (ECIP), Rapid
Response Program, and Minority Lending Programs on Community Financial Development Institutions
(CDFIs) or minority depository institutions (MDIs)?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Domestic Finance (DF) and the Community Development Financial
Institutions (CDFI) Fund
Background
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of FY 2021 provided $12 billion of emergency support
for CDFIs and Minority Depository Institutions (MDIs) to help communities respond to the
economic hardships created by the COVID-19 pandemic. The CDFI Rapid Response Program
(RRP) provided $1.25 billion in emergency funding which was distributed rapidly and
broadly to address immediate needs in response to the pandemic. The Emergency Capital
Investment Program (ECIP) invests $9 billion in CDFIs and MDIs, supporting their efforts to
provide loans, grants, and forbearance for small and minority-owned businesses and
consumers in low-income and underserved communities. The authorizing statute also
required that the Secretary of the Treasury conduct a study of the impact of the programs
on low- and moderate-income and minority communities.
Planned
By June 2022, Treasury will conduct and deliver to Congress an initial exploratory
Activities
evaluation to describe how funding from the ECIP and CDFI RRP programs was distributed
among participating institutions and the communities they serve, including low- and
moderate-income and minority communities, and to observe program outcomes that can
inform the design of a robust impact evaluation. Treasury has partnered with the General
Services Administration (GSA)'s Office of Evaluation Sciences (OES) to conduct this initial
exploratory evaluation and to identify opportunities for impact evaluations of these
programs. OES will analyze data from ECIP and RRP applications and awards as well as
recent historical CDFI data, including consumer loan reports, transaction level reports,
annual certification reports, and certification applications, to examine the distribution of
program funds to low-and moderate-income communities. To the extent possible, the
analysis will be disaggregated by ethnic group. Following the initial study, Treasury will
consider opportunities for evaluation approaches and methods based on OES's
understanding of available data and potential for causal inference.
Strategic Objective 1.4: Resilient Housing Market
Together with HUD and other federal agencies, promote a stable and resilient housing market that expands
fair and equitable access to homeownership and affordable rental opportunities and protects taxpayers.
What strategies deployed in the recovery from COVID-19 best prevented evictions and foreclosures? How
can we track evictions nationwide?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Recovery Programs (ORP) and Domestic Finance (DF)
Support: Departmental Offices: Office of Economic Policy (EP)
Background
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 charged Treasury with administering the
Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA), which provides up to $25 billion in funds to assist
households that are unable to pay rent or utilities. The American Rescue Plan (ARP)
provided an additional $21.55 billion in ERA funds. Additionally, ARP authorized the
Homeowner Assistance Fund (HAF) and provided nearly $10 billion for state, territorial,
and Tribal governments to provide relief to vulnerable homeowners to prevent mortgage
delinquencies and defaults, foreclosures, loss of utilities or home energy services, and
displacement of homeowners experiencing financial hardship. In FY 2021 and FY 2022,
Treasury issued guidance and published promising practices to encourage recipient
12
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
governments to remove barriers that prevent participants or beneficiaries from accessing
relief funds.
Planned
Treasury intends to assess equity in program implementation and evaluate program
Activities
outcomes for both ERA and HAF. Treasury is exploring the feasibility of a descriptive
analysis to understand where ERA and HAF funds were distributed and will evaluate the
effect of funds on financial, income, and housing stability.
Additionally, Treasury seeks to understand how the strategies deployed in the recovery,
including strategies adopted by Treasury in implementation of the ERA and HAF programs
and strategies that Treasury encouraged grantees to adopt, prevented evictions and
foreclosures. Treasury is exploring opportunities to engage with federal partners, including
HUD, to conduct evaluations of the emergency housing programs to inform future
recovery efforts. In the short-term, Treasury will focus on understanding the effectiveness
of strategies to prevent evictions and foreclosures. In the medium- and long-term,
Treasury may explore how the results of these evaluations may inform considerations for
the development of a national eviction prevention infrastructure.
Goal 2: Enhance National Security
Strategic Objective 2.1: Cyber Resiliency of Financial Systems and Institutions
Harden assets and systems of Treasury and the broader financial system to promote financial system
resiliency.
How can Treasury strengthen its situational awareness of cybersecurity threats in the financial sector and
encourage greater industry participation in the Office of Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure
Protection (OCCIP) initiatives?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Domestic Finance, Office of Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure
Protection (OCCIP)
Background
Treasury Office of Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure Protection (OCCIP) coordinates
the Department's efforts to enhance the security and resilience of financial services sector
critical infrastructure and reduce operational risk. The office works closely with financial
sector companies, industry groups, and government partners to share information about
cybersecurity and physical threats and vulnerabilities, encourage the use of baseline
protections and best practices, and respond to and recover from significant incidents.
Planned
OCCIP seeks to strengthen its threat sharing and risk assessment programs in the coming
Activities
years. In FY21, OCCIP engaged with Treasury's Federally Funded Research and
Development Center operated by MITRE to assess innovative information-sharing
paradigms that advance mission performance and enhanced Financial Services Sector
resiliency from cyber and all-hazards threat. MITRE's research focused on potential
approaches to enhance its situational awareness of cybersecurity threats by driving
information-sharing and encouraging greater industry participation in OCCIP initiatives.
MITRE interviewed industry stakeholders and leading practices for information-sharing
and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs), ultimately developing a Simplified Alternatives
Analysis framework and providing preliminary recommendations for OCCIP to implement
to gain stakeholder support. In FY 2022 and FY 2023, OCCIP intends to continue building
upon this research and exploring opportunities to implement these recommendations.
Strategic Objective 2.3: Modernize Sanctions Regime
Modernize the development, implementation, enforcement, and maintenance of U.S. sanctions to ensure
that sanctions remain a streamlined and effective foreign policy and national security tool.
13
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
How can Treasury best measure the effectiveness of its sanctions policies and leverage those insights to
design and implement effective sanctions policies in the future?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence
Background In 2021, Treasury conducted a broad review of the economic and financial sanctions that it
administers and enforces and issued recommendations to preserve and enhance their
effectiveness in supporting national security and U.S. interests now and in the future2.
Treasury's review engaged hundreds of sanctions stakeholders, including former Treasury
officials from both parties; key interagency partners including the Department of State,
Department of Justice, and USAID; Members of Congress and their staffs; small and large
commercial businesses and financial institutions; academics; non-governmental
organizations; and the governments of our allies and partners abroad. Treasury's review
found that while sanctions remain an essential and effective policy tool, they also face new
challenges including rising risks from new payments systems, the growing use of digital
assets, and cybercriminals, as well as situations where careful calibration can help limit the
impact of sanctions on the flow of legitimate humanitarian aid to those in need.
Planned
Treasury will conduct additional evidence-building work to support implementation of the
Activities
recommendations included in the 2021 Sanctions Review.
Goal 3: Protect Financial Stability and Resiliency
Strategic Objective 3.3: Financial Innovation
Encourage responsible financial sector innovation.
How can Treasury improve the delivery of government payments to hard-to-reach populations (e.g.,
unbanked)?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Domestic Finance
Support: Bureau of the Fiscal Service
Background
Treasury seeks to promote a financial system that delivers inclusive access to financial
services that effectively meet the needs of market participants while maintaining financial
stability and market integrity. Emerging financial technologies have accelerated aspirations
for a more equitable and inclusive financial system. Many innovations in digital finance
(e.g., digital currency) remain nascent, with risks and benefits yet to be assessed. But the
Department can and should do more to reach those whose financial needs remain unmet
by the financial services sector. Expanding access to digital financial services (payments,
credit, saving, insurance) is a key component to increasing financial inclusion, domestically
and internationally. Treasury should encourage the responsible use of innovative financial
technology, both across the financial sector and in its own programs, to deliver affordable
and secure financial services that better serve consumers and small businesses. Failing to
do so could result in financial regulation becoming unresponsive to the needs and
expectations of the public. Treasury seeks to improve delivery of payments to the public
by leveraging private sector technology. Treasury's commitment to transition to electronic
payments from physical payments (e.g., checks) has the potential to advance both its
financial inclusion and net-zero carbon goals.
Planned
The Office of Domestic Finance and the Bureau of the Fiscal Service are planning several
Activities
activities to develop evidence around barriers to receiving government payments and
opportunities for improving efficiency while maintaining payment integrity and
accessibility. The Bureau of the Fiscal Service led an Agency Priority Goal (APG) in FY 2020
and FY 2021 aimed at increasing electronic payments and will continue to explore
2
Treasury 2021 Sanctions Review
14
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
opportunities to increase electronic payments and the efficiency and security of Treasury-
disbursed payments through another APG and research and evaluation projects. In FY
2022 and FY 2023, Fiscal Service will lead an APG focused on creating a modern, seamless,
inclusive, and secure Federal payment experience for the public that meets customer
needs while reducing costs, expanding financial inclusion, and improving climate
sustainability. As it works to achieve this APG and improve the delivery of government
payments to hard-to-reach populations, Fiscal Service will work to build evidence in
support of this learning agenda question.
Goal 4: Combat Climate Change
Strategic Objective 4.2: Climate Incentives and Investments
Create and promote incentives and policies for the private sector to invest in climate-friendly and resilient
projects and activities.
How does Treasury ensure climate policies protect communities disproportionately impacted by climate-
related risk?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Economic Policy and Office of Domestic Finance
Background
Climate-related financial risks may affect financial stability and the broader economy, but
there are challenges in assessing such risks and in evaluating the need to mitigate such
risks. Executive Order 14030, Climate-Related Financial Risk³, calls for action across the
Executive Branch to assess and mitigate such risks in coordination with the independent
financial regulatory agencies. Necessary steps include developing and executing
approaches to measure and monitor impacts on the financial sector, government,
businesses, and households. Addressing these issues will ensure that investors and
institutions can appropriately gauge climate-related investment risks and opportunities
and that such risks are not amplified by adverse developments within the financial sector
or government budget.
Treasury, in its leadership role on the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and the
Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC), seeks to advance climate priorities,
including strengthening disclosures of climate-related financial risks and transitioning
away from fossil fuels, while ensuring that climate policies and investments are designed
to protect the economy from the impacts of climate change and do not disparately impact
low-income communities and communities of color.
Planned
Treasury is working to better understand financial risks to households, especially in low-
Activities
income and historically disadvantaged communities, posed by climate change and climate
transition. In October 2021, the FLEC launched an effort to study the impact of climate
change on households and communities. This effort is part of the Biden-Harris
Administration's whole-of-government approach to tackling climate change and will bring
together all FLEC agencies, and additional agencies, to write a comprehensive report with
the goal of identifying priority policy actions to increase household and community
financial resiliency. The report will explore financial risks to households and communities,
especially low-income and historically disadvantaged communities, of climate change and
climate transition. The FLEC will work to develop an understanding of:
How households, communities, and the smallest businesses experience financial
resilience in the face of climate change and climate transition, supported by
resilience-supporting financial products and financial infrastructure supporting
environments.
3
Executive Order 14030, Climate-Related Financial Risk
15
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
How to map climate-related financial risks, and identify which groups and regions
will be most impacted; and
What tools and best practices could be effective at addressing risks and
vulnerabilities and how to implement them equitably.
Strategic Objective 4.4: Sustainable Treasury Operations
Improve the Department of the Treasury's overall environmental and energy sustainability and invest in
Treasury Bureaus' adaptation and resiliency efforts to address climate change impacts on operations and
services.
What investments need to be made to address Treasury's climate vulnerabilities and how much will it
cost?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Management
Background
Executive Order 14008, Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad4, identifies the
immediate need for comprehensive action to address the catastrophic impacts of climate
change. It emphasizes that U.S. leadership-and that of federal agencies-wil be required
to significantly enhance global action and achieve the necessary policy outcomes on
climate change. Treasury is committed to using its broad and far-reaching policy influence
to lead and support implementation of this EO and identify the actions and investments
Treasury must take to address the department's vulnerabilities.
Planned
Treasury's Climate Action Plan includes an initial assessment of Treasury's vulnerability to
Activities
climate change effects and a strategy for identifying and building climate resilience at
Treasury facilities and in critical supply chains, to effectively sustain Treasury's mission.
Treasury is working to evaluate and assess the ongoing risks from climate change, identify
primary vulnerabilities and prospective impacts to Treasury operations and mission-
related functions, including its international work, and to implement effective planning.
Treasury's policy also directs Treasury bureaus to integrate climate change adaptation
planning and actions into their programs, policies, and operations.
Goal 5: Modernize Treasury Operations
Strategic Objective 5.2: Future Work Routines
Transform the Department's work routines to support changing mission and workforce needs.
How are our customers' needs changing, how are employee needs changing, and how do you foster
innovation and collaboration in a hybrid organization?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Management
Background
The convergence of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate crisis has resulted in a critical
decision point for Treasury about its long-term physical, IT, and human capital
infrastructure. Treasury has an integrated vision for transforming work routines to support
changing mission and workforce needs and the needs of the agency's customers. To
achieve this integrated vision, Treasury must modernize the Department's workplace
infrastructure and work routines to meet a "whole person" culture, maintain
competitiveness, and enable a "new normal" for an engaged and inclusive workforce of
the future.
Planned
Treasury seeks to understand how customer and employee needs are changing and is
Activities
working to foster innovation and collaboration in an environment that is continuously
transforming. Treasury's Office of Management has launched surveys and focus groups to
4
Executive Order 14008, Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad
16
Treasury FY 2022-2026 Learning Agenda
increase its understanding of employee needs throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
Several bureaus are also establishing pilots and demonstration projects to evaluate new
work arrangements and workplace designs such as remote work and hoteling.
Management, in coordination with bureau leadership and the human capital, information
technology, and operations communities, is working to integrate the results of outreach
efforts and leading practices across government to shape future planning.
Strategic Objective 5.4: Customer Experience Practices
Mature and embed strong customer experience practices across the Department, establishing Treasury's
reputation for consistently positive experiences.
What is the right beacon metric for measuring customer experience for the department?
Lead: Departmental Offices: Office of Management
Background
Treasury's bureaus and offices serve a wide range of customers including American
households, the financial sector, state and local governments, and other federal agencies.
Since 2018, the IRS has been designated as a federal High Impact Service Provider (HISP)5
and has developed annual action plans to improve customer experience and performance
of designated services. In 2022, Treasury was also designated as a HISP at the department
level. In response to the designation and to Treasury leadership identifying Maturing
Customer Experience Practices as a strategic objective, Treasury formed an enterprise-
level customer experience (CX) leadership team consisting of senior officials from
Treasury's bureaus and offices and is working to develop a broader CX Community of
Practice to promote successful adoption of CX practices through collaboration and
information sharing. While components of Treasury have invested in developing evidence
around bureau- or office-specific customer experience metrics, Treasury currently lacks
enterprise-wide metrics for measuring customer experience for the Department.
Planned
The leadership team, with the support of the Community of Practice, will conduct an
Activities
annual enterprise wide CX capacity assessment and action planning. As part of these
efforts to mature enterprise level CX practices, these groups will work to identify and
operationalize potential metrics that can be used to consistently measure CX across the
department.
5 Performance.gov - Department of the Treasury
17
