STATES
USAID
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
DEVE
AGENCY
LEARNING
AGEND
A
FY 2022-2026
March 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
* Table contents are clickable links
I. INTRODUCTION
3
II. EMERGING AGENCY PRIORITIES
3
III. CONSULTING STAKEHOLDERS TO DEFINE NEW LEARNING QUESTIONS
4
QUESTION IDENTIFICATION, VALIDATION, REFINEMENT
4
FY 2022-2026 AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA QUESTIONS
5
IV. OPERATIONALIZING THE 2022-2026 AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA
5
STRENGTHENING STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIPS AND ENGAGEMENT
7
USAID OPERATING UNIT CONTRIBUTIONS TO AGENCY-WIDE LEARNING
8
EXTERNAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO USAID LEARNING
8
ILLUSTRATIVE 2022-2026 AGENCY-WIDE EVIDENCE-BUILDING ACTIVITIES
9
V. CLOSING
10
ANNEX A: 2022-2026 DEPARTMENT OF STATE AND USAID JOINT STRATEGIC PLAN
11
JSP GOALS AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
11
FY 2022-2026 AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA QUESTION CONNECTIONS TO JSP
12
ANNEX B: FY 2022-2026 USAID AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA QUESTION DETAILS
13
OPERATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS
13
RESILIENCE TO SHOCKS
15
RESPONDING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
16
ANTI-CORRUPTION
17
AFFIRMATIVE DEVELOPMENT
18
MIGRATION AND FORCED DISPLACEMENT
20
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, INCLUSION, AND ACCESSIBILITY
22
LOCALLY-LED DEVELOPMENT
23
PARTNERING FOR SUSTAINABILITY
25
ANNEX C: FURTHER OPPORTUNITIES FOR EXTERNAL COLLABORATION ON AGENCY LEARNING
27
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
2
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
INTRODUCTION
The Foundations for Evidence-based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act) requires each Chief Financial
Officer (CFO) Act agency to develop a learning agenda that covers a four-year period aligned with that agency's
strategic plan and addresses a set of agency-wide priority learning questions. The United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) Agency Learning Agenda comprises a series of products and processes
designed to engage key stakeholders in the generation, synthesis, sharing, and use of evidence to inform
decision-making. USAID's Agency Learning Agenda is a critical tool supporting implementation of the Agency's
policy priorities, which are aligned with Interim National Security Strategic (NSS) Guidance and the
Department of State and USAID Joint Strategic Plan (JSP). By prioritizing key questions, the learning agenda
channels attention and investment toward critical evidence gaps that would limit the ability of the Agency to
achieve its policy objectives. It connects Agency learning networks and amplifies evidence from Missions and
Bureaus to maximize cross-agency awareness and learning and improve Agency effectiveness.
The Agency developed USAID's Fiscal Year (FY) 2022-2026 Agency Learning Agenda alongside the 2022-2026
Joint Strategic Plan to reflect emerging USAID policy priorities. The development process, which began in
January 2021, engaged key internal and external stakeholders to identify critical learning needs for emerging
Agency priorities and define a small, prioritized set of Agency-wide learning questions. USAID has also
assessed the implementation of previous learning agendas to identify good practices and continuously
improve the Agency Learning Agenda processes, as well as build on existing learning networks and evidence.
II. MERGING AGENCY PRIORITIES
USAID's Agency Learning Agenda is an important tool to transparently communicate how the Agency will build
and use evidence to inform decision-making as the Agency operationalizes its policy priorities. The Interim NSS
Guidance, published in March 2021, provides direction for departments and agencies to align their actions as the
Biden Administration begins work on a National Security Strategy.
The Department of State and USAID FY 2022-2026 Joint Strategic Plan includes goals and strategic objectives that
align with the interim NSS and Administration priorities (see Annex A for a full listing of JSP goals and strategic
objectives):
Goal I:
Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges
that have the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
Goal II:
Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which
the United States can thrive.
Goal III:
Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote
human dignity.
Goal IV:
Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and institutions.
Goal V:
Serve U.S. citizens around the world and facilitate secure international travel.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
3
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Simultaneously, USAID has identified emerging Agency policy priorities that align with one or more of the JSP
goals:
I.
COVID-19 and future pandemic threats (JSP Goal I,II)
2. Climate Change (JSP Goals I, II, III)
3. Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding (JSP Goals I, III)
4.
Democracy, Anti-Corruption, and Human Rights (JSP Goal II, III)
5.
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (JSP Goals I, II, III, IV)
6. Localization (JSP Goals I, II, III, IV)
Over the next year, the Agency and interagency will develop whole-of-government strategies to address many of
these challenges. Following the release of these plans and strategies, the NSS, and the JSP, USAID will update its
Policy Framework and further define the Agency's programmatic and operational response.
III. CONSULTING STAKEHOLDERS TO DEFINE NEW
LEARNING QUESTIONS
QUESTION IDENTIFICATION, VALIDATION, REFINEMENT
As a learning best practice, and in fulfillment of the requirements of the Evidence Act and Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) guidance, USAID actively engaged key stakeholders to define new learning questions related
to the Agency's emerging priorities. Through a series of more than 20 consultative sessions and subsequent
question validation discussions held from May through August 2021, internal stakeholders provided input on
learning priorities and critical evidence needs representing views from across the sectors and geographies in
which USAID works. Additional consultations with external stakeholders captured a range of perspectives,
including those of the interagency, other donors, congressional staff, higher education institutions, researchers,
international development-focused think tanks, and nongovernmental organizations.
Agency Learning Question Identification Process
Stakeholder consultations explored
Emerging Agency Policy Priorities
emerging USAID policy areas & JSP Goals
Insights identified evidence gaps and
Evidence Gaps & Learning Priorities
learning priorities not otherwise
covered in the Agency
Fifteen draft learning questions were
15 Draft Agency Learning Questions
circulated for validation, prioritization,
and refinement
Nine draft learning questions further
9 Draft Agency Learning Questions
refined, presented for Agency
leadership review and approval
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
4
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
FY 2022-2026 AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA QUESTIONS
USAID has identified a final list of nine priority Agency Learning Agenda questions.
2022-2026 USAID AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA QUESTIONS
1. How can USAID better streamline systems, processes and resources to meet long-term needs identified by
Missions, while enabling the flexibility to respond quickly to unexpected shifts in context?
2. How can USAID strengthen household, community, and country resilience to climate, conflict, economic, and
health shocks, such as COVID-19 and other global pandemic threats?
3. How can USAID best engage global actors, partner countries, and local leaders to mitigate the climate crisis and
support equitable adaptation to its impacts?
4. How can USAID work with host countries, interagency colleagues, and other development actors to address
systemic corruption through multisectoral approaches?
5. How can USAID advance an affirmative, sustainable development approach to mitigate authoritarian or malign
influences and actions?
6. How can USAID better address drivers of migration and forced displacement through evidence-informed
decision-making?
7. How can USAID programs and operations mitigate harm to underrepresented and marginalized populations,
while promoting equity and inclusion?
8. How can USAID more equitably engage local knowledge, assets, and practices and align programming with local
priorities and metrics for success?
9. How can USAID's partnerships with the private sector; local, faith, and nontraditional partners; and other donors
contribute to sustainable development objectives?
Each question connects to multiple JSP strategic objectives and all of USAID's emerging policy priorities to
facilitate collaborative learning across Agency sectors and geographies. Questions provide high-level direction to
guide the development of more specific or context-relevant evidence-building questions for Agency evaluation
or research efforts. See Annex B for more details on each question, including context, connections to strategy,
intended use, illustrative learning activities, and existing learning and evidence.
IV. OPERATIONALIZIN G THE 2022-2026 AGENCY
LEARNING AGENDA
USAID's decentralized organizational structure extends far beyond its Washington Bureaus to programs and staff
in more than 100 countries around the world. Development programming takes place across many technical
areas, including agriculture; economic growth; environment; education; democracy, human rights, and
governance; women's empowerment; water and sanitation; and global health. Additionally, USAID leads the U.S.
Government's humanitarian response to disasters and crises overseas. Agency investments in evidence and
learning are made across USAID geographies and sectors through many activities, including sectoral and topical
learning agendas, evaluations, research studies, assessments, and monitoring efforts. USAID uses the Agency
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
5
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Learning Agenda to create and strengthen a centralized architecture for Agency-wide learning, engaging key
stakeholders to build, share, and use evidence and knowledge across these decentralized USAID structures and
systems.
To do so, USAID is intentionally identifying which existing Agency learning networks, evidence, and foundational
learning topics will contribute to the 2022-2026 learning agenda. USAID will build on the success of a Mission
Advisory Group for the Agency Learning Agenda to encourage field Mission staff to share learning and ask
questions about Agency priority topics as well as learn about tools and resources that connect their
country-focused learning priorities, findings, and resources to the rest of the Agency. All Agency learning
products completed to date will remain hosted as an Agency-wide Evidence and Resource Collection on
ProgramNet, the Agency's internal knowledge-sharing platform. Public learning products will remain archived on
the Development Experience Clearinghouse, the Agency's online resource for USAID-funded technical and
project materials, and USAID Learning Lab, a public platform for collaborating, learning, and adapting.
Foundational learning topics (areas previously explored in Agency learning efforts, for which critical evidence
gaps remain) include operational effectiveness; the humanitarian-development-peace nexus; strengthening
locally-led development and integrating local voices and priorities into USAID's work; and approaches to
partnering and engagement. The table outlines connections between foundational learning topics and the
2022-2026 learning questions.
FOUNDATIONAL
RELATED FY 2022-2026
LEARNING TOPIC
LEARNING QUESTIONS
Q1 operational effectiveness
Operational Learning
Q7 diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility
Q1 operational effectiveness
Q2 resilience to shocks
Humanitarian - Development - Peace Nexus
Q3 responding to climate change
Q6 migration and forced displacement
Strengthening Locally-led Development
Q3 responding to climate change
Q8 locally-led development
Q4 anti-corruption
Partnering and Engagement Approaches
Q5 affirmative development
Q9 partnering for sustainability
The Agency Learning Agenda is not only a series of products or outputs, it is also a behavior change process
intended to strengthen the use of evidence to improve the Agency's effectiveness. USAID commissioned a rapid
stocktaking exercise in June 2021 to examine: 1) how learning agenda activities contributed to the generation
and use of evidence, and 2) whether Agency learning processes and networks influenced staff attitudes and
behaviors around learning. Key findings show that newsletters, Agency Notices, and learning events have been
valuable in raising awareness and sharing evidence resulting from learning activities. However, reported use of
learning agenda evidence in decision-making was limited. Staff requested more user-friendly knowledge
products that are shorter in length and use plain language and also sought direct assistance in applying evidence
in their work. Staff cited the 2020 Agency-wide Learning Week, peer-to-peer assistance, and cross-Mission
sharing sessions as helpful models.
Initial Agency Learning Agenda networks, including cross-Agency volunteer Question Teams and the Mission
Advisory Group, were found to help members advocate for and share their work beyond their Bureaus or
Missions. Participation in these networks increased staff awareness of available Agency learning resources,
including evidence syntheses, fact sheets, toolkits, and how-to notes; however, these effects often did not
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
6
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
translate beyond those more immediately involved to the broader Agency workforce. The voluntary nature of
Question Team and Mission Advisory Group membership was cited as a constraint to active and long-term
participation in Agency-wide learning networks and evidence-building activities, and participants believe that
this negatively affected the quality and timeliness of evidence dissemination. Areas identified for future
improvement include: 1) clearer coordination among Agency learning efforts, 2) more systematic dissemination
of knowledge products, 3) greater financial and human resources available for Agency Learning Agenda efforts,
and 4) more engagement in learning by Agency leadership and between USAID Missions and Washington
Operating Units (OUs).
USAID is using these findings, as well as inputs from the USAID Capacity Assessment, to inform the
implementation of the Agency Learning Agenda. The rapid stocktaking process has also established a foundation
for future analyses of learning agenda progress and outcomes, contributing to the Agency's evidence base on
learning agenda design and implementation.
STRENGTHENING STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIPS AND ENGAGEMENT
Based on the stocktaking and given limited resources for Agency Learning Agenda evidence-building activities,
USAID will focus available resources on: 1) synthesizing and packaging available evidence for use; 2) convening
internal and external stakeholders working on similar evidence-building activities; 3) building awareness and
improving dissemination of available evidence; and 4) supporting the use of evidence in strategic, operational,
and programmatic decision-making. For example:
Synthesizing findings and recommendations from existing research and evaluation reports connected to
Agency priorities, like the Human and Institutional Capacity Development (HICD) Desk Review that
generated 1,017 page views across USAID's external sites. The Agency Learning Agenda will support the
synthesis and packaging of evidence for stakeholders to access and apply available evidence more
easily.
Strengthening field learning networks, Mission participation in Agency learning, and collaboration
between Washington OUs and Missions through structures like the Mission Advisory Group. The Agency
Learning Agenda will expand field engagement so that Missions not only are the producers and users of
evidence, but also determine where and how the Agency Learning Agenda focuses its efforts to best
meet Mission learning needs.
Using the USAID/Washington Learning Agenda Snapshot-an internal catalog maintained in
collaboration between the Bureau of Policy, Planning, and Learning and points-of-contact for topical,
sectoral, and geographic learning agendas managed by Washington-based USAID OUs-to focus
learning resources strategically. Developed in response to staff requests for centralized documentation
of learning agendas, the Snapshot includes a spreadsheet containing a brief description, status,
points-of-contact, learning questions, and key outputs for each learning effort.
Leveraging virtual platforms to convene global audiences around Agency learning, building on the
success and lessons learned from the 2020 Agency-wide Learning Week, which hosted nearly 500
participants across 16 learning sessions, including staff from 65 Missions. The Agency Learning Agenda
will expand opportunities for Agency stakeholders to participate in evidence exchange with external
stakeholders and thought leaders, including, for example, roundtable discussions on specific Agency
Learning Agenda questions.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
7
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
USAID OPERATING UNIT CONTRIBUTIONS TO AGENCY-WIDE LEARNING
Internally, the USAID workforce remains the Agency's most critical asset in evidence generation and use. Missions
and Washington OUs support the Agency Learning Agenda by:
Incorporating context-and/or sector-specific evidence-building questions that align with and contribute
to the Agency Learning Agenda into relevant documents, such as strategies; performance management
and monitoring, evaluation, and learning plans; and technical or sectoral Mission or Bureau learning
agendas.
Referencing the Agency Learning Agenda questions in solicitations and other procurement documents.
Incorporating appropriate evidence-building opportunities (monitoring, evaluation, research, learning)
that respond to these questions into program design and implementation.
Generating and capturing experiential knowledge related to Agency Learning Agenda questions at
critical milestones in strategy or program design and implementation; for example, as part of Before-
and After-Action Reviews, mid-course stocktaking, or pause-and-reflect exercises.
Sharing Agency Learning Agenda evidence in reports and public communications and using Agency
Learning Agenda communications channels and platforms to share evidence with broad Agency and
external audiences.
Participating in Agency-wide learning events and peer-to-peer networks hosted by the Agency Learning
Agenda to share knowledge and evidence.
Reviewing and using Agency Learning Agenda evidence as part of decision-making related to Agency
strategies, operations, and programming.
Directing funding or other support to the Agency Learning Agenda to invest in Agency-wide
evidence-building activities that address critical evidence gaps.
Agency leadership has an essential role to play in supporting staff in learning efforts and using evidence to
inform their strategic investments and programmatic and operational decision-making. Leadership forums, such
as the Management Operations Council, Mission Directors calls, and the Program Officers Conference, present
key opportunities for leaders to engage with and act on Agency Learning Agenda evidence.
EXTERNAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO USAID LEARNING
Just as USAID relies on collaboration with external partners to implement our programs, USAID must also
collaborate to sufficiently resource the generation, synthesis, translation, dissemination, and uptake of evidence
needed to address Agency Learning Agenda questions. USAID pursues and invites collaboration from external
partners on all Agency Learning Agenda questions, including contributions from the Department of State and
other interagency partners, implementing partners, local actors, researchers and higher education institutions,
think tanks, and other donors. USAID leadership, including the Agency Evaluation Officer and Agency Knowledge
Management and Organizational Learning Officer, will continue to advise on the Agency Learning Agenda's focus
and methods, help link its activities and evidence to other Agency learning efforts, and connect it to learning
across the international community through participation on external platforms, such as the Multi-Donor
Learning Partnership for Development Impact and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development's
Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) Evaluation Network. More information on how external actors
might engage with the Agency Learning Agenda can be found in Annex C.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
8
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
ILLUSTRATIVE 2022-2026 AGENCY-WIDE EVIDENCE-BUILDING ACTIVITIES
The nine Agency Learning Agenda questions are intentionally broad to capture and synthesize Agency evidence
from technical and sectoral learning and research agendas, evaluations, research, and experiential learning
opportunities. All questions are long-term in nature (2022-2026), and a mix of near-and longer-term activities
will contribute toward addressing each question. The timeline for activities will be determined in line with key
milestones identified by intended users, against which related evidence can be applied in decision-making. An
initial set of Agency evidence-building activities linked to each of the learning questions is outlined in the table
below. Further details for each learning activity, including timeline and methods, can be found in Annex B.
The FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan includes details on additional planned significant evaluations not listed
below. USAID has defined significant evaluations as those that generate evidence toward Agency Learning
Agenda questions and are either a performance evaluation of a USAID activity with a budget of $40 million or
more; or an ex-post evaluation; or an impact evaluation (for definitions of ex-post and impact evaluation at
USAID, see Automated Directives System 201).
FY 2022-2026
ILLUSTRATIVE LEARNING ACTIVITIES*
LEARNING QUESTION
Performance Plan and Report (PPR) COVID-19 key issue analysis in
USAID annual reporting process (Performance Plan and Report, PPR)
COVID-19 Strategy and Operations Task Force (CTF) Hotwash
1. Operational Effectiveness
Mission Management Assessment policy update and pilot
Customer Service Framework development to enhance a culture of
internal service
2. Resilience to Shocks
Performance Evaluation: Institutional Resilience and COVID-19
Learning from implementation of the USAID Climate Readiness Plan,
3. Responding to Climate Change
including the forthcoming 2022 - 2030 USAID Climate Strategy
Performance Evaluation: Anti-Corruption and COVID-19
4. Anti-Corruption
Analysis and Research on Social Norms and Behavioral Approaches to
Combating Corruption
Countering People's Republic of China Influence Fund Monitoring,
5. Affirmative Development
Evaluation, and Learning
Interagency Root Causes Strategy Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
Plan and Semi-Annual Root Causes Strategy Results Reports
6. Migration and Forced Displacement
Vanderbilt University's AmericasBarometer the and Latin American
Public Opinion Project
Analysis of Migration data from Customs and Border Protection
7. DEIA
Agency internal equity assessment phased learning data collection
support
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
9
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Stopping as Success +
8. Locally-led Development
Local Works
Local Knowledge Best Practices in External Organizations
Pilot Testing Local Knowledge Tools
Enduring Results 4.0
9. Partnering for Sustainability
Private Sector Engagement (PSE) Evidence Gap Map Phase II
USAID Partnering Process Analysis
* Additional details on each of these activities is provided in Annex B.
V. CLOSING
Built on a foundation of stakeholder consultation and evidence from the implementation of other learning
agendas to date, the 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda serves as an evidence-building roadmap as the
Agency tackles the most pressing policy issues of our time. The Agency Learning Agenda ensures that the Joint
Strategic Plan and USAID policy objectives will be informed by evidence-based decisions. It is a critical tool to
advance the Agency's policy priorities and ensure that data and evidence inform USAID's work. The learning
agenda aims to bring together Agency staff and external partners under a unified vision and effort to build and
use evidence to support an effective U.S. Government response to critical international development and
humanitarian needs.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
10
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
ANNEX A: 2022-2026 DEPARTMENT OF STATE AND
USAID JOINT STRATEGIO PLAN
JSP GOALS AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Goal I:
Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have the
greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
1.1: Strengthen global health security, combat infectious disease threats, and address priority
global health challenges through bilateral engagement and within multilateral fora.
1.2: Secure ambitious climate mitigation and adaptation outcomes, including supporting
effective Paris Agreement implementation.
1.3: Reinvigorate U.S. humanitarian leadership and provide lifesaving protection and assistance
in response to international disasters and humanitarian crises overseas.
1.4: Lead allies and partners to address shared challenges and competitors; prevent, deter, and
resolve conflicts; and promote international security.
1.5: Enhance foreign publics' understanding of and support for the values and policies of the
United States.
Goal II:
Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
2.1: Promote a global economy that creates opportunities for all Americans.
2.2: Support inclusive and sustainable economic growth and opportunity for communities across
the globe.
2.3: Support U.S. technological leadership, strengthen competitiveness, and enhance and
protect the U.S. innovation base while leveraging technology to improve lives around the
world.
2.4: Strengthen U.S. and global resilience to economic, technological, environmental, and other
systemic shocks.
Goal III:
Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
3.1: Promote good governance and defend strong, accountable, and resilient democracies that
deliver for their citizens.
3.2: Advance equity, accessibility, and rights for all.
3.3: Prevent, expose, and reduce corruption.
3.4: Promote a safe, humane, and orderly immigration and asylum system, address the root
causes of irregular migration collaboratively with our partners, and enhance protections for
refugees and displaced persons.
3.5: Improve inclusive and equitable health, education, and livelihood services, especially for
women, youth, and marginalized groups.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
11
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
(JSP Goals and Strategic Objectives continued from previous page)
Goal IV:
Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and institutions.
4.1: Build and equip a diverse, inclusive, resilient, and dynamic workforce.
4.2: Modernize IT and leverage data to inform decision-making and support mission delivery.
4.3: Protect our personnel, information, and physical infrastructure from 21st century threats.
Goal V:
Serve U.S. citizens around the world and facilitate secure international travel
5.1: Support and serve American citizens traveling or residing abroad.
5.2: Advance U.S. interests by facilitating legitimate travel to and from the United States.
FY 2022-2026 AGENCY LEARNING AGENDA QUESTION CONNECTIONS TO JSP
2022 - 2026 Department of State and USAID Joint Strategic Plan Strategic Objectives
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
4.1
4.2
4.3
Q1 Ops Effectiveness
Q2 Resilience to
Shocks
Q3 Responding to
Climate Change
Q4 Anti-Corruption
Q5 Affirmative
Development
Q6 Migration & Forced
Displacement
DEIA
Q8 Locally-led
Development
Q9 Partnering for
Sustainability
FY 2022-2026 Agency Learning Agenda Questions align with all JSP strategic objectives to which USAID contributes
(JSP Goal V and related Strategic Objectives are managed exclusively by the Department of State).
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
12
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
ANNEX B: FY 2022-2026 USAID AGENCY LEARNING
AGENDA QUESTION DETAILS
The Agency Learning Agenda questions represent a mix of operational and strategic Agency-wide learning
opportunities. Operational questions consider how USAID does its work and focus on human and financial
resources, partnering and procurement processes, systems and technology, training and staff capacity, and
other similar areas. Strategic questions consider the what of the Agency's technical work, building connections
across sectors and geographies.
There are two notable challenges in developing evidence to support policymaking across the USAID policy
priority areas that are covered by the nine cross-cutting questions. The first challenge relates to restrictions on
the initial funding that the Agency received; namely, limitations on how early supplemental COVID-19 response
and recovery funds could be used for monitoring, evaluation, and learning activities. To overcome this challenge,
USAID requested, and recently received, program funds to support evidence generation, synthesis, and
peer-to-peer learning events that can facilitate the use of evidence in Agency decision-making in the face of
COVID-19. The second challenge relates to issues in data quality for particular policy priorities such as DEIA and
migration . To overcome data gaps and restrictions, USAID is working closely with interagency partners to ensure
that Agency policymaking is informed by comprehensive and up-to-date evidence and data.
The following tables provide details on each learning question; including context, connections to strategy,
intended use, illustrative learning activities, and existing learning and evidence.
1
OPERATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS
How can USAID better streamline systems, processes and resources to meet long-term needs identified by Missions,
while enabling the flexibility to respond quickly to unexpected shifts in context?
Question 1 focuses on aspects of USAID's operational effectiveness; particularly ways in which the Agency can
better align budget, policy, programming, staff, and systems - and reduce unnecessary administrative
burdens, or "sludge' - to achieve its mission. The question considers operational factors that affect how well
long-term development and humanitarian needs identified by Missions are addressed in strategies and
programming, given resource limitations, mandates, directives, or other barriers or tradeoffs. It also creates
space for investigating how Agency systems and processes enable flexible and timely response to
game-changing shifts in operating context, including crises such as the global COVID-19 pandemic, while
balancing long-term development and humanitarian needs.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal IV: Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and infrastructure.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
13
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Illustrative Learning Activities
Performance Plan and Report (PPR) COVID-19 Key Issue Analysis in USAID Annual Reporting Process
MARCH 2022
As part of their PPR, USAID Missions have been asked to submit an open narrative regarding the portfolio adaptations
they have made or plan to make in the near future in response to the pandemic. Each narrative consists of an open
narrative with a 10,000 character limit. USAID will analyze the narrative submissions to determine common themes,
areas requiring support from USAID/Washington, examples of effective adaptation for sharing within the Agency or
other areas that support learning priorities in USAID's COVID-19 Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan.
Qualitative analysis of USAID Mission submissions of the COVID-19 key issue narrative in the annual PPR. Specific themes of interest are portfolio
adaptations in response to the pandemic and the policies, processes, and structures that enabled or hindered those adaptations.
COVID-19 Strategy and Operations Task Force (CTF) Hotwash
NEXT REPORT: FY 2022 Q2
USAID is conducting ongoing hotwashes for the COVID-19 Strategy and Operations Task Force (CTF) to reflect on the
CTF's operations over the course of the previous months and to gather lessons learned to improve the continued
performance of the CTF.
Qualitative analysis of data collected through facilitated focus group discussions with individuals including both those who serve on and those who
collaborate with the CTF.
Mission Management Assessment Policy Update and Pilot
SUMMER 2022
USAID uses a business review process called Mission Management Assessments (MMAs) to help Mission, Operating Unit
(OU), and Regional Bureau senior managers identify what is working and can be emulated elsewhere; major, often
immediate, management issues; and propose practical and feasible steps to address gaps or weaknesses. USAID
conducted a policy effectiveness review of the ADS guidance on MMAs in 2021 with the goal of shifting the focus of
MMAs to organizational learning. USAID updated the draft guidance based on the recommendations from the review
and is piloting the updated draft guidance this fall and winter with volunteer Missions in the Africa and Asia Bureaus
before finalizing the ADS guidance in 2022.
Qualitative data analysis to inform the initial policy updates; and qualitative and quantitative data analysis to validate final policy changes.
Customer Service Framework Development to Enhance a Culture of Internal Service
FEBRUARY 2022
The Framework is a follow-up to the Customer Service Culture Assessment USAID conducted in 2021. Respondents from
the assessment noted varied interpretations and understandings of the Agency's approach to customer service. USAID
will develop the Customer Service Framework by bringing together customer service champions to outline the Agency's
customer service definition, vision, and staff responsibilities and competencies.
Qualitative analysis of input provided by customer service champions.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
Fighting Ebola with Information: Learning from the Use of Data, Information, and Digital Technologies
in the West Africa Ebola Outbreak Response
Humanitarian-Development Coherence in Education White Paper
Evidence Base for Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting: Adaptive Management
Bureau for Management Operational Excellence Agenda (Internal)
COVID-19 Response and Recovery MEL Plan (Internal)
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
14
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
2
RESILIENCE TO SHOCKS
How can USAID strengthen household, community, and country resilience to climate, conflict, economic, and health
shocks, such as COVID-19 and other global pandemic threats?
Question 2 focuses on USAID programming seeking to strengthen resilience, defined as the ability of people,
households, communities, countries, and systems to mitigate, adapt to, and recover from acute and recurrent
shocks and stresses in a manner that reduces chronic vulnerability and facilitates inclusive growth. Building
resilience requires strengthening the capacities that help people and systems to:
-
absorb shocks by minimizing exposure to them and changing behavior to deal with the impact;
adapt measures that identify and manage risks over the longer term; and
-
transform as the underlying conditions are changed.
By leveraging evidence on the effectiveness of interventions and which factors enable adaptation to adversity,
USAID is driving evidence-based investments that enable better management and adaptation to shocks.
Question 2 creates opportunities to better connect, synthesize, and disseminate the resilience evidence-base
being built across the Agency, so that USAID can holistically strengthen resilience to a range of complex and
competing shocks and stressors, including climate, conflict, economic, and health shocks. Learning from the
implementation of USAID's Resilience Policy, currently undergoing revision, will be key to addressing this
question.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
Illustrative Learning Activities
Performance Evaluation: Institutional Resilience and COVID-19
FY 2023 Q2
The United States COVID-19 Global Response and Recovery Plan outlines the U.S. government's commitment to building
resilience and bolstering political, economic, and social systems that have been affected by COVID-19. The purpose of
this evaluation is three-fold. Results will inform:
1.
Ongoing decisions about how USAID can strengthen systems resilience through adaptations to existing
programs and the development of new programs.
2.
USAID's strategies for building community and systems-level resilience capacities, so that public and private
systems are stronger in the face of future pandemics.
3.
USAID's operational and programmatic approaches to systems strengthening and capacity building more
broadly, ensuring that these efforts support, rather than undermine, local efforts.
A mixed-method approach that triangulates across quantitative and qualitative data sources. Global assessment, with case studies in specific countries
identified through initial data collection.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
15
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
ResilienceLinks: assessments, case studies, discussion papers, reports
Transforming Systems in Times of Adversity: Education and Resilience White PaperResearch Agenda for
Land and Resource Governance
3
RESPONDING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
How can USAID best engage global actors, partner countries, and local leaders to mitigate the climate crisis and
support equitable adaptation to its impacts?
Climate change is a planetary crisis that is leaving no corner of the world untouched. Failure to aggressively
address this crisis will have dire consequences for us all. Conversely, responding to the climate crisis helps
avoid these dangerous consequences and incentivizes economic, technological, ecological, and sociopolitical
innovations in the very systems it threatens. Climate change affects the frequency, intensity, and duration of
extreme weather events, alters precipitation patterns, disrupts ecological systems, and causes temperatures
and sea levels to rise. These changes in turn exacerbate economic, sociocultural, and ecological inequities and
contribute to hunger, poverty, malnutrition, displacement, fragility, and increased mortality.
Climate change impacts go beyond just the environmental sector to affect human health, nutrition and food
security, ecosystems and biodiversity, peace and stability, and access to essential services, such as health
care; water, sanitation, and hygiene; and education. Climate change threatens to drive increases in maternal
and child malnutrition, is an increasing threat to national security, and contributes to migration, displacement
and increased pressure on scarce government resources. Climate change also exacerbates inequalities,
increasing the vulnerability of marginalized and underrepresented populations to gender-based violence,
dispossession, and disempowerment. Addressing climate change is a top priority for USAID as part of the U.S.
government's renewed and strengthened commitments to building climate resilience and helping limit
warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius as called for under the Paris Agreement. Within the larger U.S. government
effort, USAID plays a leading international role by working on the ground with partner governments and local
actors to strengthen mitigation and adaptation.
Question 3 focuses on USAID programming and operations seeking to mitigate climate change and address its
impacts-across all sectors-by partnering with global actors, partner countries, and local actors to reduce
emissions, protect critical ecosystems, transition to renewable energy, build resilience and support equitable
adaptation against the impacts of climate change, and promote the flow of capital toward climate-positive
investments.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values and promote human dignity.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
16
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Illustrative Learning Activities
Learning from implementation of the USAID Climate Readiness Plan, including the USAID Climate Strategy
ONGOING, 2022-2030
The 2021 Climate Readiness Plan outlines actions USAID will implement across the Agency's operations management
functions and programs to adapt to the effects of changing climate. USAID developed its Climate Readiness Plan in
response to Executive Order 14008, Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad. The Plan supports and aligns with
USAID's forthcoming 2022-2030 Climate Strategy and demonstrates USAID's whole-of-Agency approach to combating
the climate crisis.
Through the Climate Readiness Plan, USAID will implement priority climate adaptation and risk-mitigation actions
across its program processes and management functions to increase the resilience of the Agency's core mission to
known climate threats and vulnerabilities. Learning from implementation will inform Agency operations and
programming, including mainstreaming climate across USAID's work, improving climate risk management and supply-
chain resilience, building a climate-ready workforce, and using data to ensure climate-ready facilities and services.
Determination of methods forthcoming, as part of Climate Strategy Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
USAID ClimateLinks
Evaluation of Climate Risk Management at USAID (2020)
4
ANTI-CORRUPTION
How can USAID work with host countries, interagency colleagues, and other development actors to address systemic
corruption through multisectoral approaches?
The fight against corruption is a key U.S. domestic and foreign policy priority and a core national security
interest. Corruption fundamentally undermines development progress across all sectors-whether health,
education, economic growth, or building resilience to climate change. Corruption robs developing countries of
an estimated $1.26 trillion annually, while destabilizing democratic societies, undermining the rule of law, and
diminishing the integrity of democratic institutions. Authoritarian regimes have weaponized corruption to
consolidate their rule and undermine confidence in democratic processes and norms. In many USAID partner
countries, corruption fuels violence, funds transnational criminal and terrorist enterprises, and perpetuates
the trafficking of drugs, arms, and people. In the context of COVID-19, corruption impedes the integrity of
emergency responses and humanitarian efforts to deliver lifesaving resources to affected and vulnerable
communities.
USAID targets systemic corruption by aiming to build systemic accountability across the public-private
landscape, including by expanding and accelerating efforts to build local capacity to prevent, detect, mitigate,
and sanction corruption; strengthening oversight, accountability, and justice sector institutions; supporting
open government and transparency norms; and empowering civil-society and media reformers to uncover
corruption and hold governments to account. Question 4 focuses on how USAID can best partner with others
on multisectoral anti-corruption interventions that promote good governance, government transparency, and
accountability to support development objectives across all sectors.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
17
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
Illustrative Learning Activities
Performance Evaluation: Anti-Corruption and COVID-19
FY 2023 Q2
The purpose of this evaluation is to further our understanding of USAID anti-corruption programming in the context of
the COVID-19 crisis. This study will assess how the Agency's new and existing anti-corruption initiatives have been able
to respond to and address pandemic-enabled corruption. In addition, the evaluation will identify successful approaches
and examine the coordination of COVID-19-sensitive anti-corruption programming both internally and with USAID's
external partners. This performance evaluation aims to inform both future and ongoing programming to diminish the
harmful effects of COVID-19-enabled corruption.
A mixed-methods evaluation that collects and analyzes both quantitative survey data and data derived from qualitative interviews with various
stakeholders involved in different stages of USAID'S COVID-19 response.
Analysis and Research on Social Norms and Behavioral Approaches to Combating Corruption
FY 2023 Q2
This research project will use a case study approach to gather data, complemented by reference to existing literature, to
consider the fundamental questions of how and when social and behavioral approaches should be used to counter
corruption in diverse contexts across USAID partner countries. This analysis will include fragile and post-conflict
countries, casting light on any adaptations to such contexts and whether any approaches are generalizable. The
research will also consider whether there are early indicators of corruption-related social norms. The primary
anticipated outcome of this project is an analytic report to inform the Anti-Corruption Task Force's work in updating
USAID's anti-corruption policy, strategy, and technical practice.
This project will use a case study methodology. It will include research of at least five (preferably eight to ten) cases. The cases must be regionally diverse
and can be at the local, regional, or country level. The project will also include initial analysis of how this evidence can be applied to (1) USAID's
assessments of corruption; and (2) USAID approaches to supporting reformers and building systemic accountability.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
Analysis of USAID Anticorruption Programming Worldwide (2007-2013)
Combating Corruption Among Civil Servants: Interdisciplinary Perspective on What Works
Aiding or Abetting? Cross-national Effects of Foreign Aid on CorruptionCombating Conservation Crime
Learning Agenda
5
AFFIRMATIVE DEVELOPMENT
How can USAID advance an affirmative, sustainable development approach to mitigate authoritarian or malign
influences and actions?
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
18
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Amid the 16-year democratic decline globally documented by Freedom House, nine more countries slipped
into a state of autocracy in the last 5 years alone, affecting civil liberties of more than 300 million people.
Authoritarians are using the COVID-19 pandemic as a further excuse to curb individual freedoms and tighten
their grip on power. The pandemic has also tested the ability of fragile democracies that are trying to respond
and maintain public confidence in their institutions. The People's Republic of China (PRC) increasingly
supplies technological surveillance tools to other nations and uses its financial leverage to sway their actions.
When countries turn to the governments of the PRC, Iran, Russia, and North Korea for investments and
support, outcomes are detrimental to U.S. interests and overall progress toward reaching development goals.
In response, USAID works to:
-
bolster democracy throughout the world when there is a political opening or an attempt to roll back
democratic progress;
-
help countries fight misinformation and disinformation, increasingly used by malign actors to stoke
public anger against democratically elected officials and civil society;
-
support activists and citizens subjected to digital repression by regimes that are becoming
increasingly sophisticated at surveilling and censoring their populations;
-
continue to provide support for governments to align regulatory frameworks for emerging
technologies with democratic values;
-
work to support independent and public interest media, helping journalists and whistleblowers
withstand government repression, legal harassment, disinformation, and attacks on media outlets'
financial viability; and
-
build the resilience of democratic institutions by supporting the separation of powers, including
independent judiciaries and electoral institutions, and stronger legislatures.
Question 5 focuses on building evidence and data to support Missions in knowing when and how to compete,
counter, and engage with adversaries and competitors working in the same countries as USAID.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
JSP Goal IV: Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and infrastructure.
Illustrative Learning Activities
Countering People's Republic of China (PRC) Influence Fund (CPIF) Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning
VARIES PER CPIF ACTIVITY
In FY 2020, USAID and the Department of State solicited and reviewed 167 proposals totaling $1.5 billion and selected
84 innovative proposals from field Missions and Washington Bureaus to operationalize the Countering Chinese
Influence Fund (CCIF; officially renamed the Countering PRC Influence Fund for FY 2022).
USAID is working with the Department of State to determine monitoring, evaluation, and learning activities for the suite of CCIF-funded proposals.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
19
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
V-Dem Democracy Report 2021 - Autocratization Turns Viral
Theories of Democratic Change Phase II: Paths Away from Authoritarianism
Countering Malign Kremlin Influence Development Framework - Implementation Report
Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance Learning Agenda (Internal)
6
MIGRATION AND FORCED DISPLACEMENT
How can USAID better address drivers of migration and forced displacement through evidence-informed
decision-making?
USAID programs related to migration and forced displacement span all regions in which the Agency works and
often implicate both humanitarian and development assistance resources, tools, and approaches. For
example, in Central America's Northern Triangle region, USAID plays an integral role in the implementation of
the Biden-Harris Administration's whole-of-government approach to ensure orderly, safe, and humane
migration, including the Root Causes Strategy and the Collaborative Migration Management Strategy.
Question 6 focuses on the Agency's use of data and evidence in its work to address drivers of migration and
forced displacement. Drivers (root causes, determinants) are the intersecting factors that, together, compel
the movement of individuals, families, or population groups. USAID works with civil society, U.S. and local
private-sector partners, faith-based groups, and partner-government officials to understand and address the
interrelated economic, governance, and security conditions that contribute to migration and forced
displacement. In doing so, the Agency seeks to leverage rigorous analysis of data, lessons learned from past
programming, and local and worldwide expertise to bring together the latest evidence around drivers of
migration and innovative approaches to address root causes of migration.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
JSP Goal IV: Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and infrastructure.
Illustrative Learning Activities
Interagency Root Causes Strategy Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan and
Semi-Annual Root Causes Strategy Results Reports
DECEMBER 2021; SEMI-ANNUAL AND ANNUAL REPORTING
USAID and the Department of State, with input from other departments/agencies, are developing an interagency
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan for the U.S. Strategy to Address the Root Causes of Irregular Migration
from Central America (Root Causes Strategy).
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
20
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Per guidance from the National Security Council (NSC), USAID and the Department of State, in collaboration with other
departments/agencies, produce semi-annual results reports. USAID and State submitted the first of these reports to the
NSC and Office of the Vice President in November 2021. An early version of the draft Root Causes Strategy MEL Plan
informed the structure and analysis of the November 2021 report, which highlighted preliminary results and context
data organized by the five Root Causes Strategy pillars. Six U.S. agencies provided performance indicator data from
more than 120 unique activities in Central America for the report. The context and performance metric data will be
useful as benchmarks for comparing and analyzing future commitment and results data. Future semi-annual results
reports will provide updated FY 2021 results data and incorporate new programs and data as Root Causes Strategy
implementation matures. Starting in 2022, versions of the annual results reports prepared in the spring also will be
submitted to Congress and published online, in line with legislative mandates.
RCS results reports and reports to Congress
Context indicators: Sourced to independent third-parties and national governments, context indicator values for specific countries are compared to
regional and other benchmarks, as appropriate, and over time.
Performance indicators: The November 2021 results report presented preliminary results data reported to U.S. agencies by implementing partners. These
data primarily serve as a benchmark for analyzing future results data. They also provide an initial snapshot of short-term results that are expected to
lead to longer-term outcomes. Future results reports will include data (results and targets) on these performance indicators, as well as additional
indicators for recently launched and future programs.
Vanderbilt University's AmericasBarometer and Latin American Public Opinion Project (LAPOP)
BIENNIAL
Vanderbilt University developed the AmericasBarometer-which USAID has partially funded since 2004-to monitor and
analyze issues related to democratic governance, citizen security, migration intentions, and related issues in the Latin
America and Caribbean (LAC) region. This survey has been a vital resource in designing, focusing, and evaluating USAID
programs in Central America to better address the root causes of migration. Vanderbilt carried out the 2021 surveys in
22 countries with more than 64,000 interviews. The team provides focused analysis of migration-related issues in El
Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras and has provided country-specific and region-wide briefings to LAC Missions, the
LAC Bureau, and interagency partners.
Vanderbilt University, the AmericasBarometer, and the Latin America Public Opinion Project (LAPOP) are widely recognized as the gold standard for
methodological rigor. A detailed description of Vanderbilt's survey and sampling methods, as well as results of the surveys, is available here.
Analysis of Migration data from Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
ONGOING
To fill data gaps on the number and demographic makeup (e.g., sub-national origins, age, sex) of individuals emigrating
from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras USAID began receiving and analyzing select origin data provided by CBP.
Data were used to underpin a USAID-commissioned study on the statistical links between violence, development, and
waves of Central American migrants to the United States. USAID expanded data sharing through a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) signed by USAID and CBP in March 2020 that provides USAID regular access to data-including
de-identified data on migrants' city and country of permanent residence-collected from Salvadoran, Guatemalan, and
Honduran migrants encountered by CBP officials at the U.S.-Mexico border.
Quantitative analysis of data from CPB.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
USAID/Honduras Reducing Homicide and Migrations Rates through CLA
Documenting Learning and Decisions in a Refugee Context in Uganda
Foundational Skills Development Learning Agenda
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
21
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
7
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, INCLUSION, AND ACCESSIBILITY
How can USAID programs and operations mitigate harm to underrepresented and marginalized populations, while
promoting equity and inclusion?
In its operations, USAID is committed to a diverse, equitable, inclusive workplace where everyone has an
opportunity to thrive. The Agency's Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Strategy commits USAID to improving
and enhancing diversity throughout the Agency; enhancing inclusion and equity for everyone in the work
place; and strengthening accountability for promoting and sustaining a diverse workforce and an inclusive
Agency culture. Annual implementation plans will outline key tasks for each year of the DEI Strategic Plan. The
Agency will monitor Strategic Plan performance via indicators outlined in a Monitoring and Learning Plan.
Programmatically, USAID recognizes that historical marginalization, geographical isolation, cultural prejudice,
racism, and other complex systemic challenges affected by power, privilege, opportunity, and access to
resources have led to inequities and exclusion. Development efforts designed without intentional respect for,
and participation by, underrepresented and marginalized populations can result, at best, to exclusion of these
groups from equal access to benefits of development investments, and at worst, to disproportionate harm. To
ensure that U.S. foreign assistance investments reduce (rather than reinforce) structural disparities, USAID
seeks to advance equity and inclusion proactively and support the underserved.
USAID achieves this, in part, through approaches to inclusive development; the concept that every person,
regardless of their identity, is instrumental in transforming their societies. Development processes that are
inclusive yield better outcomes for the communities that embark upon them. USAID promotes the rights and
inclusion of marginalized and underrepresented populations in the development process and leads the U.S.
government's response to addressing the needs of children in adversity and youth. USAID implements
activities that combat stigma and discrimination, promote empowerment and inclusion of marginalized or
underrepresented groups, and improve the lives of populations in high-risk situations.
Question 7 considers how USAID can promote equity and inclusion in programs and operations, reduce
disparities due to racial and ethnic identity and other drivers of vulnerability, and mitigate harm to
underrepresented and marginalized populations. Evidence will inform how USAID can safeguard against or
address any negative consequences to underrepresented or marginalized populations associated with Agency
operational and programmatic policies and practices.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
JSP Goal IV: Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and infrastructure.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
22
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Illustrative Learning Activities
Agency Internal Equity Assessment Phased Learning Data Collection Support
SPRING 2022
USAID, in compliance with Executive Order 13985, conducted equity assessments on barriers to entry for potential
partners and the different elements of the Civil Service employment life cycle. USAID will conduct additional equity
assessments on the different elements of the Foreign Service employment life cycle and the different elements of the
employment life cycle for non-direct-hire hiring mechanisms.
A mixed-methods approach that utilizes both qualitative data collection and quantitative data analysis. USAID identified barriers to entry for potential
USAID partners and analyzed promising employment practices at the Agency. USAID will engage in baseline metric data collection around its Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion monitoring and learning plan and will conduct an After-Action Review on the Foreign Service promotion process and an assessment
of barriers to equity in the non-direct-hire hiring mechanisms.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
USAID Racial Equity Assessment (Internal)
Education in Crisis and Conflict Learning Agenda
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion MEL Plan (Internal)
8
LOCALLY-LED DEVELOPMENT
How can USAID more equitably engage local knowledge, assets, and practices and align programming with local
priorities and metrics for success?
Locally-led development is the process in which local actors-individuals, communities, networks,
organizations, private entities, and governments-set their own agendas, develop solutions, and bring the
capacity, leadership, and resources to make those solutions a reality. USAID recognizes that local leadership
and ownership are essential for fostering sustainable results across our development and humanitarian
assistance work. Locally-led development is not a single approach, but a range of ways that USAID, its
partners, and communities can work together to shift agenda-setting and decision-making power into the
hands of local actors.
To inform these shifts, Question 8 focuses on how USAID can more equitably engage the knowledge, assets,
and practices of local actors. This means investigating and documenting promising local practices that can be
amplified through our work, the ways that USAID currently interacts with local actors and knowledge systems,
the power dynamics inherent to these engagements, and opportunities for local actors to lead technical
direction and agenda setting. This question also aims to explore how USAID might better share data and
evidence with local actors to support their initiatives and programs.
USAID can catalyze and facilitate local leadership of development and humanitarian assistance in a variety of
ways throughout the design, procurement, management, and measurement of assistance. Question 7
additionally aims to explore how local priorities and metrics for success are and can be incorporated across
the program cycle.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
23
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
JSP Goal IV: Revitalize the diplomatic and development workforce and infrastructure.
Illustrative Learning Activities
Stopping as Success + (SAS+)
FY 2025 Q3
Stopping as Success: Locally Led Transitions in Development (SAS+) builds on learning outcomes over the past three
years from the consortium's existing evidence base about "what works" in responsible transitions. USAID-funded SAS+
will enable development partnerships to be more locally led, transitions to be more effective and sustainable for the
local actors involved, and systems of development actors (local organizations, international partners, and USAID) to be
more responsive to the communities in which they work by applying, refining, and disseminating findings and tools
from the first round of research (SAS, 2017-2020) through an accompaniment approach with existing development
partnerships.
Prime consortium partner CDA Collaborative Learning Projects (CDA) will leverage collaborative and participatory research methodologies to learn with
local and international partners, communities, and organizations to create actionable evidence for more effective and accountable development efforts.
Local Works
FUNDING THROUGH AT LEAST FY 2025
The congressionally-directed Local Works program advances locally led development around the world, while also
enhancing USAID's ability to support local actors. With 5-year discretionary funds, Local Works provides Missions more
time and greater freedom to pursue locally led programming and innovative ways of working with resources, tools, and
opportunities to try new development approaches that are more flexible, locally responsive, and locally sustainable.
Local Works collaborates with Missions, their local partners, and research partners to generate learning through the Local Works Community of Practice,
partner-driven MEL and reporting, case studies, research & development activities (see SAS+, above), and evaluations.
Local Knowledge Leading Practices in External Organizations
JUNE 2022
Through the support of Virtual Student Federal Service Interns, USAID is investigating how development organizations
outside USAID approach local knowledge definitions; how and when local knowledge is used; what best practices exist;
what other organizations' experiences have been; and where there is or is not consensus within the greater
development sector on these topics.
Literature review and interviews with a variety of development organizations (Public International Organizations, bilateral donors, nongovernmental
organizations, activist groups, etc.).
Pilot Testing Local Knowledge Tools
DECEMBER 2022
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
24
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
USAID selected five tools, some internal and other external, that Missions can use to increase use of local knowledge in
their programming. Draft summary sheets describing each tool were produced, and an exploration of how to pilot test
and eventually scale up the use of these tools is ongoing.
Iterative field testing followed by qualitative data collection from test users to improve the five tools.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
Local Works Stories from the Field
Locally-Led Development Research 2017-2020
Recommendations for Improving Capacity Strengthening Approaches
Developing Locally-Relevant Measure of CommitmentHigher Education Learning Agenda
9
PARTNERING FOR SUSTAINABILITY
How can USAID's partnerships with the private sector; local, faith, and nontraditional partners; and other donors
contribute to sustainable development objectives?
Today, private sources represent more than 90 percent of financial flows into emerging markets. Inclusive
growth can only be achieved when USAID works with the private sector-as a driver of capital markets- to
spur greater development impact. Our approach to global development is enterprise-driven. The Agency is
undergoing an intentional shift toward pursuing market-based approaches and investment as a more
sustainable way to empower people and communities worldwide.
Simultaneously, the Agency's New Partnerships Initiative helps USAID partner with new, nontraditional, and
local actors to advance their development goals-while elevating the quality of our partnerships through
strengthened accountability, capacity, and local leadership. USAID supports partnerships that promote local
leadership; seeks innovative approaches to strengthening the capacity, performance, and accountability
structures of our partner ecosystem; and identifies new and nontraditional sources of funding to sustain
partnerships and scale impact. USAID also works with bilateral donor organizations like the United Kingdom,
Japan, and Sweden; multilateral organizations, such as the World Bank Group, other Regional Development
Banks and the various United Nations agencies; and country partners who may still receive assistance, such as
India, South Africa, and Indonesia. By coordinating and working closely with other donors, USAID improves
the delivery, impact, and sustainability of development assistance, thereby maximizing development results.
Question 9 will look across a range of USAID approaches to partnering, to better understand how partnerships
with specific actors contribute toward sustained development results.
Connections to Strategy
JSP Goal I: Renew U.S. leadership and mobilize coalitions to address the global challenges that have
the greatest impact on Americans' security and well-being.
JSP Goal II: Promote global prosperity and shape an international environment in which the United
States can thrive.
JSP Goal III: Strengthen democratic institutions, uphold universal values, and promote human dignity.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
25
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Illustrative Learning Activities
Enduring Results 4.0
FY 2023 Q1
The Enduring Results 4.0 Study will examine the drivers of sustainability and scale in USAID's partnerships with the
private sector. The study will identify factors that have contributed to the continuity of activities and outcomes and the
role that partners play in enabling enduring results. The study will build on the work done in the third iteration of the
Enduring Results series.
The study will utilize data from multiple sources, including the Agency's public-private partnership database and interviews with USAID staff,
implementing partner staff, and private-sector partners. The findings from these interviews will be examined through a framework designed for the
Enduring Results series.
Private Sector Engagement (PSE) Evidence Gap Map Phase II
FY 2023 Q1
The Private-Sector Engagement (PSE) Evidence Gap Map (EGM) facilitates the use of evidence in PSE approaches and
helps to identify knowledge gaps. The tool consolidates the breadth of PSE research and evidence available both
internal and external to USAID. In phase II of the EGM, additional evidence will be added to the repository and evidence
synthesis reports will be created for priority topics.
New evidence will be identified through a targeted search strategy that includes key terms related to private-sector engagement in development. More
information on the methodology can be found here.
USAID Partnering Process Analysis
FY 2022 Q2
Using systems engineering and multi-stakeholder perspective approaches to examine the end-to-end private-sector
engagement process employed by USAID from problem definition, partner selection, engagement negotiation,
implementation, and closeout to: 1) map out the engagement processes; 2) identify bottlenecks and root causes that
affect PSE formation, operations, relationships, and health using a systems approach; and 3) identify leading practices
to address these challenges.
Qualitative research methods including process mapping techniques, focus group discussions, semi-structured interviews, in-depth multiple cases study
analysis, and narrative analyses were used.
Examples of Existing Learning and Evidence
Private-Sector Engagement Evidence Gap Map
Enduring Results Study 3.0
PIVOT-SRLA Learning Review
Stories from the New Partnerships Initiative
Multi-Donor Learning Partnership for Development Impact
Private Sector Engagement Evidence and Learning Strategy
PIVOT: Practical, Innovative, On-the-Job Training Cohort Program
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
26
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
ANNEX C: FURTHER OPPORTUNITIES FOR EXTERNAL
COLLABORATION ON AGENCY LEARNING
Department of State
The Evaluation Officers Council and other interagency meetings provide
and Interagency
opportunities for evidence exchange around shared learning priorities.
Implementing and local partners play an essential role in advancing USAID's learning
and can contribute to the learning agenda by:
Submitting concept notes, applications, and proposals that incorporate
learning questions, objectives, and best practices in data collection,
Implementing and
reporting, and evaluation in support of the Agency Learning Agenda
Local Partners
Working with USAID to co-design research aligned to the learning agenda.
Informing USAID of new findings related to learning agenda themes.
Disseminating findings from the learning agenda within their organizations
and across relevant networks.
Applying findings from the learning agenda to the implementation of USAID
activities
Individual researchers, research institutions, and Higher Education Institutions play a
unique role in advancing USAID's learning by generating knowledge through basic
and applied research, supporting its application, and developing solutions that
contribute to development and innovation. Researchers can contribute to the Agency
Learning Agenda by:
Aligning research interests of faculty and students with the questions and
themes to co-design and complete research projects of mutual interest and
Researchers and
benefit.
HEIs
Informing USAID of knowledge and research related to learning agenda
themes.
Responding to anticipated requests and calls for information and research
on specific topics.
Joining new and existing networks and communities of practices to foster
additional interest and collaborations.
Using findings from the Agency Learning Agenda to inform research and
networks.
Think Tanks play a fundamental role in disseminating evidence to drive
Think Tanks
policymaking.
USAID's participation in the Multi-donor Learning Partnership and other donor
Other Donors
coalitions fosters collaboration in evidence synthesis and identification of evidence
gaps.
USAID
FY 2022-2026 USAID Agency Learning Agenda
27
FROM THE AMERICAN F PEOPLE
