CAPACITY
ASSESSMENT
USDA
U.S. Department of
Agriculture
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Table of Contents
Introduction
1
Stakeholder Engagement
1
Capacity Assessment Structure
2
Concepts and Principles
2
Capacity Assessment Findings
4
Research
6
Evaluation
8
Statistics
10
Other Analysis
13
Capacity Assessment Inventory
15
Acronyms and Abbreviations
26
i
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Introduction
Under the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act), USDA is
required to conduct a Capacity Assessment of the coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and
independence of the Department's evaluation, research, statistics, and analysis functions. The
Capacity Assessment is intended to establish a baseline of existing evidence-building capacity,
identify gaps, and recommend areas for improvement to strengthen USDA's ability to build and use
evidence to inform decision-making. USDA will also use the Capacity Assessment to determine
priority areas in which evidence should be bolstered to inform future budget requests.
Stakeholder Engagement
Throughout FY 2021, OBPA conducted a
number of stakeholder engagement activities
to inform the development of the Capacity
Assessment. USDA's internal stakeholders
STRATEGIC
were organized into the following standard
DIRECTION
USDA Leadership
hierarchy to ensure that all levels were
appropriately engaged and to provide clarity
around roles and responsibilities:
DEPARTMENTAL
OPERATIONS
Strategic Direction: Responsible for setting
Staff Offices
the Department's strategic direction
(Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and Sub-
Cabinet officials);
MISSION DELIVERY AND PERFORMANCE
Mission Areas and Agencies
Departmental Operations: Responsible for
supporting strategic implementation
Deliver benefits and services
efforts in alignment with the Department's
strategic goals and objectives (staff offices such as OBPA, Human Resources, Office of the Chief
Information Officer, etc.); and
Mission Delivery and Performance: Responsible for aligning agency strategic directions and
resources with the Department-wide strategic directions and for delivering statutorily required
missions, functions, programs, projects, etc. (all USDA Mission Areas and Agencies).
OBPA convened the Evidence Act Working Group (EAWG) to collaborate on the Capacity
Assessment and other Evidence Act deliverables. The EAWG was a cross-functional team that
included representation from across USDA Mission Areas and Agencies and served as the conduit
between OBPA and Mission Area and Agency leadership. OBPA regularly engaged with the EAWG
through a series of interactive workshops to appropriately scope the Capacity Assessment and
solicit feedback on draft materials.
In addition to coordination with the EAWG, OBPA conducted a number of interviews with USDA
senior leaders with subject matter expertise in statistics, evaluation, research, and data.
Interviewees included the Chief Evaluation Officer, Chief Data Officer, Statistical Official, and
Deputy Chief Economist. These leaders were asked to provide their insights on USDA's current
evidence-building capacity, including where in the Department evidence building practices are
strongest, what areas would most benefit from strengthening evidence-building capacity, and
which specific programs require additional investment to fill existing evidence gaps. OBPA then
conducted additional interviews with Agency-level Assistant Evaluation Officers, members of the
EAWG, and other experts in evidence functions to supplement this information.
1
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Capacity Assessment Structure
In accordance with the Evidence Act and relevant guidance from the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB), the Capacity Assessment Findings section of this document covers:
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of
the Department support the needs of various divisions within the Department;
The extent to which the evaluations, research, and analysis efforts and related activities of
the Department achieve an appropriate balance between needs related to organizational
learning, ongoing program management, performance management, strategic
management, interagency and private sector coordination, internal and external oversight,
and accountability;
The extent to which the Department uses methods and combinations of methods that are
appropriate to Departmental divisions and the corresponding research questions being
addressed, including an appropriate combination of formative and summative evaluation,
research, and analysis approaches;
The extent to which the evaluation and research capacity is present within the Department
to include personnel and agency processes for planning and implementing evaluation
activities, disseminating best practices and findings, and incorporating employee views and
feedback; and
The extent to which the Department has the capacity to assist Departmental staff and
program offices to develop the capacity to use evaluation research and analysis approaches
and data in the day-to-day operations.
The Capacity Assessment Inventory section contains a list of the highest-priority activities and
operations of the Department that are currently being evaluated and analyzed, as identified by the
Mission Areas and Agencies.
For the purposes of this inaugural Capacity Assessment, OBPA focused its efforts on establishing a
baseline understanding of how well the Department is positioned to create and leverage evidence
to support strategic decisions (i.e., how the Department meets its mission(s), including how
programs, policies, and regulations function both individually and in combination) over operational
decisions (i.e., human resources, grant-making procedures, financial systems and tracking, and
internal processes).
Concepts and Principles
In its Memorandum M-19-23, OMB directs agencies to assess their evidence activities across five
dimensions: coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness, and independence. For the purpose of the
Capacity Assessment, USDA used the following definitions for these dimensions, which are adapted
from OMB Circular A-11 Section 290: Evaluation and Evidence-Building Activities:
Coverage: Describes the evidence activities that are happening and where in the
Department the activities are occurring.
Quality: Describes the extent to which data and other information used in the course of
conducting evidence activities are of high quality with respect to utility, objectivity, and
scientific integrity.
2
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Methods: Describes the techniques, systems, and processes used in evidence generation.
Methods may vary by evidence type; however, all methodologies should include an
appropriate level of rigor and take an empirically proven approach.
Effectiveness: Describes the extent to which evidence activities are meeting their intended
outcomes, including serving the needs of stakeholders and being disseminated
appropriately.
Independence: Describes the extent to which the activities being carried out are free from
bias and inappropriate influence.
3
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Capacity Assessment Findings
In conducting the Capacity Assessment, OBPA identified 12 recommendations for strengthening
evidence-building capacity in research, evaluation, statistics, and other forms of analysis. These
recommendations, if implemented, would serve to improve the coverage, quality, methods,
effectiveness, and independence of USDA's evidence functions. In the near term, USDA's Evidence
Act Designated Officials will work to prioritize these recommendations for implementation based
on leadership priorities and resource availability.
RESEARCH
Consideration
Coverage
Quality
Methods
Effectiveness
Independence
Build cross-cutting research
partnerships
Improve employee training on
and awareness of research tools
and information
EVALUATION
Consideration
Coverage
Quality
Methods
Effectiveness
Independence
Stand up a centralized evaluation
office or offices
Incorporate evaluation into
program design
Ensure adherence to the USDA
Evaluation Policy
Foster an organizational culture
that values evaluation
STATISTICS
Consideration
Coverage
Quality
Methods
Effectiveness
Independence
Streamline data collection
methods and reduce burden on
customers
Increase programming language
v
proficiency among statisticians
Centralize information
technology structures to improve
v
data access
Foster a collaborative learning
v
v
v
environment for statistical staff
4
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
OTHER ANALYSIS
Consideration
Coverage
Quality
Methods
Effectiveness
Independence
Strengthen the use of
performance data in decision-
making
Leverage the Data Science
Workbench to improve analytical
functions
The findings below are intended to move USDA to a higher level of maturity with respect to its
evidence-building activities. The dimension(s) of evidence - coverage, quality, methods,
effectiveness, and independence - that the recommendations could improve if implemented are
noted throughout the document. The Evidence Act Designated Officials may consider using the
Capacity Assessment results to guide resource allocations to strengthen capacity in the most
critical areas of need. Through these efforts, USDA can take steps towards improving and
enhancing its evidence-building activities, increasing stakeholder buy-in and understanding of the
benefits of evidence for strategic decision-making, and facilitating a robust learning culture
Department-wide.
5
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Research
The Office of the Chief Scientist provides leadership and coordination to ensure that research
supported by and scientific advice provided to the Department and external stakeholders is held to
the highest standards of intellectual rigor and scientific integrity. The Office of the Chief Scientist
strives to inform policy and programmatic decisions within the Department by providing the best
available scientific advice and input; establishing appropriate linkages between USDA and other
scientific organizations in government (U.S. and abroad), academia, and industry; and ensuring the
dissemination of scientific research and science performed by the Department to policy makers and
decision leaders across the spectrum of policymaking Nationally and internationally.
The Research, Education, and Economics Mission Area is dedicated to creating a safe, sustainable,
competitive U.S. food and fiber system, as well as building strong communities, families, and youth
through integrated research, analysis, and education. It is the home to USDA leadership responsible
for advancing scientific knowledge related to agriculture through credible scientific research,
economic data, statistical analysis, and scientific guidance. Of the five Agencies under this Mission
Area, four are primarily responsible for research activities, described below:
The Agricultural Research Service is USDA's chief scientific in-house research Agency. It has
a workforce of approximately 8,000 employees, including 2,000 scientists and post-
doctoral fellows in more than 90 research locations. The Agricultural Research Service's
research mission is to find solutions to agricultural problems that affect Americans every
day from field to table and includes about 660 research projects within 15 National
programs. The primary research focus areas of the Agency include animal production and
protection; crop production and protection; natural resources and sustainable agricultural
systems; and nutrition, food safety, and quality. The Agency produces an annual Report on
Science, a compendium of research accomplishments over the previous year that
demonstrate the Agency's impact on the food we eat, the water we drink, and the air we
breathe. The Agency positions itself strategically to address agricultural challenges by
gathering input from customers and stakeholders and conducting research that addresses
programmatic research goals throughout five-year cycles. The 2020 Annual Report on
Science can be found here.
The National Institute of Food and Agriculture is USDA's primary extramural research,
education, and extension Agency, providing leadership and funding for programs that
advance agriculture-related sciences. The Agency invests in and supports initiatives that
ensure the long-term viability of agriculture and applies an integrated approach to ensuring
that groundbreaking discoveries in agriculture-related sciences and technologies reach the
people who can put them into practice. Through partnerships with the Land-Grant
University System and government, private, and non-profit organizations, National
Institute of Food and Agriculture programs can provide solutions to those who need them.
The Economic Research Service (ERS) anticipates trends and emerging issues in agriculture,
food, the environment, and rural America and conducts economic research to inform public
and private decision-making. ERS provides statistics on food security, farm income, and
agricultural productivity and contributes to the work of USDA's World Agricultural Outlook
Board.
The National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) is responsible for ensuring the quality,
objectivity, and transparency of the statistical information and analysis provided by the REE
6
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Mission Area. NASS and ERS are USDA's two federal statistic agencies responsible for this
effort.
USDA has additional research authorities in divisions of the Food Safety and Inspection Service,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Food and Nutrition Service, and Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, and Marketing and Regulatory Programs. These researchers contribute
funding, human capital, and collaborative expertise to USDA science efforts.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BUILDING RESEARCH CAPACITY
USDA has identified several recommendations to strengthen research functions to support
evidence-based decision-making:
Build cross-cutting research partnerships: Mission Areas and Agencies may consider
building relationships across the Department to facilitate collaborative and cross-cutting
research efforts. In particular, USDA could prioritize new research partnerships or building
on existing efforts that focus on supporting the priorities of the Secretary and the
Administration, such as advancing equity, climate, and customer experience.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the coverage and effectiveness of USDA's
research functions.
Improve employee training on and awareness of research tools and information: Results
from the 2020 Federal Managers Survey: Results on Government Performance and
Management Issues from the Government Accountability Office (GAO) showed that USDA
has opportunities to improve the research-related capabilities of its program-level staff in a
number of dimensions including increasing employee awareness of research tools and
information; strengthening program staff knowledge and skills needed to collect and
analyze information for research; and facilitating access to research performed by external
partners such as other Federal agencies, academic researchers, and think tanks.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the quality of USDA's research functions.
7
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Evaluation
USDA engages in a range of evaluation activities to support operational effectiveness, rulemaking,
and decision-making. As USDA does not have a centralized evaluation office, most evaluation
activities are planned and conducted on an individual basis by Mission Areas and Agencies
according to their established planning processes. Through data calls related to the Department's
FY 2023 Evaluation Plan and budget submission, as well as stakeholder interviews, OBPA
determined that many Mission Areas and Agencies have an opportunity to improve their capacity
for conducting high-quality and rigorous program evaluations. The list below reflects the Mission
Areas and Agencies whose evaluation work is reflected in the USDA Learning Agenda and FY 2023
Evaluation Plan (note that it is not a comprehensive listing of all evaluation work across USDA):
The Food and Nutrition Service within the Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services Mission
Area conducts a variety of studies, evaluations, and related activities that respond to the
needs of policymakers and managers and help ensure that nutrition assistance programs
achieve their goals effectively. The Office of Policy Support leads the development and
execution of FNS's Research and Evaluation Plan (the Agency's FY 2021 Research and
Evaluation Plan can be found here).
Rural Development has a robust evaluation function that focuses on the impact of programs
to improve the economy and quality of life in rural America. Many ongoing evaluations focus
on building infrastructure (e.g., Community Facilities, broadband) and providing clean
water, as well as ensuring equitable program access for historically disadvantaged and
underserved communities.
A selection of the Department's program evaluation activities is documented in its Annual
Evaluation Plan, which describes the significant evaluations USDA plans to undertake in the coming
fiscal year. The FY 2022 Evaluation Plan can be found here.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BUILDING EVALUATION CAPACITY
USDA has identified several recommendations to strengthen evaluation functions to support
evidence-based decision-making:
Stand up a centralized evaluation office or offices: Mission Areas and Agencies, especially
those whose evaluation capacity is less mature, could benefit from having an independent
evaluation office to assist with evaluation planning, design and implementation. Such an
office could be situated under a staff office such as OBPA, Office of the Chief Economist
(OCE), or the Office of the Chief Scientist and support the evaluation needs of the
Department enterprise-wide; alternatively, multiple offices could be established at the
Mission Area and Agency level. By centralizing the planning and management of evaluations
under one entity, the Department could maximize efficient use of its resources and support
the lower-maturity Mission Areas and Agencies in improving their evaluation capacity.
If
implemented, this recommendation would improve the coverage, quality, methods,
effectiveness, and independence of USDA's evaluation functions.
Incorporate evaluation into program design: When designing a new program or modifying
an existing one, program managers should consider future data collection needs for
conducting evaluations. Further, program managers and staff could use logic models to
articulate the intended outcomes and impact of programs and strengthen overall program
8
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
readiness for evaluation. Developing or describing the theory of change can also be helpful
for identifying data and evidence needs.
The Department may also consider building provisions into its grant programs that require
grantees conduct evaluations t or access to data so that evaluations may be conducted by a
third party. This approach could help USDA embed institutional learning into program
design and development and would likely require additional resources (e.g., staff, training,
funding) to implement.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the coverage, quality, and effectiveness of
USDA's evaluation functions.
Ensure adherence to the USDA Evaluation Policy: The USDA Evaluation Policy establishes
best practices and requirements for all evaluations conducted across the Department. It
gives USDA employees, partners, and stakeholders a common framework for conducting
evaluations and defines the core standards and principles by which evaluators must abide.
Mission Areas and Agencies should identify opportunities to align internal policies and
procedures to the Department-wide Evaluation Policy and educate staff on how to
implement the policy as needed.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the quality, methods, effectiveness, and
independence of USDA's evaluation functions.
Foster an organizational culture that values evaluation: Evaluation is often misunderstood
as a mechanism for highlighting inefficiencies or performance issues within programs. The
GAO 2020 Federal Managers Survey: Results on Government Performance and Management
Issues indicated that USDA could expand opportunities for program managers to participate
in evaluation training. Increased education and training on a variety of topics such as the
benefits of evaluation for improving program outcomes, using evaluation to inform
decision-making, and generating and using data for evaluations could facilitate a shift
toward a learning-positive culture among program staff and managers. This cultural
transformation can be supported by Agency and Departmental leadership championing
efforts to strengthen evaluation capacity and exemplifying a commitment to building and
using evidence in their decision-making.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the coverage quality, methods, effectiveness,
and independence of USDA's evaluation functions.
9
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Statistics
USDA's statistical capabilities primarily reside in four agencies: NASS, ERS, the Foreign Agricultural
Service (FAS), and the Agricultural Marketing Service. Collectively, these four Agencies contribute
to the USDA Economics, Statistics, and Marketing Information System, which contains more than
2,100 publications on international agriculture and related topics.
NASS and ERS are two of the thirteen Federal statistical Agencies which collect, analyze, and
disseminate statistical information. Under OMB Statistical Policy Directives, these Agencies are
responsible for the quality, objectivity, and transparency of statistical information and analysis.
NASS is the primary statistical Agency for USDA and conducts hundreds of surveys every year and
prepares reports covering virtually every aspect of U.S. agriculture. Production and supplies of food
and fiber, prices paid and received by farmers, farm labor and wages, farm finances, chemical use,
and changes in the demographics of U.S. producers are only a few examples. NASS is committed to
providing timely, accurate, and useful statistics in service to U.S. agriculture by:
Reporting the facts needed by people working in and depending on American agriculture;
Providing objective and unbiased statistics on a preannounced schedule that is fair and
impartial to all market participants;
Conducting the Census of Agriculture every five years, providing the only source of
consistent, comparable, and detailed agricultural data for every county in America;
Serving the needs of data users and customers through a network of State field offices and
cooperative relationships with universities and State Departments of Agriculture; and
Safeguarding the privacy of farmers, ranchers, and other data providers, with a focus on
confidentiality and data security.
ERS conducts statistical analyses that inform and enhance public and private decision-making on
economic and policy issues related to agriculture, food, the environment, and rural America. To
accomplish this mission, ERS economists and social scientists develop and disseminate a broad
range of science-based economic and statistical information to the public. The suite of ERS data and
statistical products encompasses estimates, forecasts, economic and statistical indicators, and data
compiled from diverse sources where ERS adds value in the form of recompilation and/or subject
matter expertise. ERS disseminates its information to key stakeholders and the public through an
array of outlets, including the ERS website. ERS' policies and procedures for publishing research and
data, designed to ensure that the Agency provides high quality and objective analysis, include:
Data Product Quality: ERS ensures that quality standards are embedded in data products for
purpose, utility, objectivity, transparency, integrity, and accessibility;
Error Correction: In the event that a substantive error is detected in a disseminated
information product, ERS will make a correction; and
Scientific Integrity: ERS is committed to upholding the protections and responsibilities
outlined in USDA's Scientific Integrity Policy, which protects scientific findings from
suppression or alteration and ensures the quality and accuracy of data and analysis.
FAS has a global network of nearly 100 offices covering approximately 180 countries. These offices
are staffed by agricultural attachés and locally hired agricultural experts who are the eyes, ears, and
voices of U.S. agriculture around the world. FAS' network of global contacts and long-standing
relationships with international groups contribute to the Agency's unique market intelligence
capacity. FAS analysts provide objective intelligence on foreign market conditions, prepare
10
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
production forecasts, assess export opportunities, and track changes in policies affecting U.S.
agricultural exports and imports.
The Agricultural Marketing Service produces a variety of statistical reports on topics including
organic foods; cotton and tobacco; dairy and milk products; fruits, vegetables, and specialty crops;
livestock, meats, poultry, eggs, grain, and hay; organic; and local and regional foods. The Agency also
maintains several National and program-level databases.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BUILDING STATISTICAL CAPACITY
USDA has identified several recommendations to strengthen statistical functions to support
evidence-based decision-making:
Streamline data collection methods and reduce burden on customers: The USDA Data
Strategy for FY 2021 - 2023 notes that data are often collected manually from the
Department's customers, such as farmers and ranchers, through surveys and other
resource-intensive methods. The Department has already undertaken efforts to reduce the
burden of the data collection process, such as the development of a tool by NASS that will
leverage multiple data sources and integrate existing systems to reduce process steps and
timelines for data collection and reporting. USDA may consider identifying additional
opportunities to ensure that data can be gathered once and shared accordingly to provide
accurate information back to customers in a more expeditious and meaningful manner.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the methods of USDA's statistical functions.
Increase programming language proficiency among statisticians: The USDA Office of the
Chief Data Officer recently conducted a data skills assessment and associated gap analysis,
surveying more than 1,200 employees across the Department to identify gaps in data skills
and management. The need for programming language proficiency was identified as the
second-most critical skill for Departmental staff. As the Department continues to adopt
open-source tools, statisticians will increasingly require skills in statistical languages such
as Python and R to meet the demand for statistical products from USDA and its customers.
One Mission Area has procured licenses for an asynchronous training software tool that can
tailor Python and R trainings to analysts' current knowledge, experience, and interest in
programming languages. Expanding on such initiatives to broaden programming language
expertise will enable USDA to conduct more effective and efficient statistical analyses.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the quality and methods of USDA's statistical
functions.
Centralize information technology structures to improve data access: According to the
data skills gap analysis referenced above, the management of IT processes has been
historically decentralized at USDA, which has created siloed legacy systems and
technologies that impede data access and degrade data quality. Manual workarounds are
often used to compensate for limitations in the existing legacy applications, increasing the
need for historic program knowledge across staff. Such issues can limit staff's ability to
respond quickly to emerging issues or perform robust statistical analysis, due to the amount
of time spent mitigating data access challenges. USDA will consider bolstering ongoing
efforts to make data more accessible, available, and usable in the Enterprise Data Analytics
Platform and Toolset and other central platforms to eliminate data siloes and facilitate more
efficient statistical activities.
11
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the quality and methods of USDA's statistical
functions.
Foster a collaborative learning environment for statistical staff: The NASS Human Capital
Plan notes that employees have expressed a desire for non-classroom development and
increased collaboration across NASS to learn from one another. USDA has established two
communities of practice, the Advanced Analytics Community of Practice and the Data
Visualization Community of Practice, to raise the collective awareness and knowledge
levels of staff. Continuing to provide opportunities to share best practices, challenges, and
successes related to statistical analysis could be an effective way to improve skill
development across NASS and other USDA agencies.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the coverage, quality, methods,
effectiveness, and independence of USDA's statistical functions.
12
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Other Analysis
The OCE is the focal point for economic and policy-related research and analysis for USDA. OCE
aims to inform public and private decision makers by providing unbiased information and data-
driven analyses of current and emerging issues impacting agriculture. OCE comprises five sub-
offices, four of which serve various roles related to economic and policy analysis, such as economic
intelligence and the commodity outlook for U.S. and world agriculture; weather assessments and
real-time yield intelligence; risk assessments and cost-benefit analysis of regulations; development
and coordination of USDA policy on pest management; and assessments on energy, environmental
markets, and climate change.
The OCE Immediate Office conducts economic and policy analysis and advises the
Secretary on the economic impacts of market developments, program changes, legislative
proposals, key U.S. trade initiatives, and agricultural labor issues. Immediate Office staff
also coordinate sustainable development and Food Loss and Waste activities of the
Department. OCE economists within the Office support USDA policy decision-making by
analyzing the impact of proposals and coordinating a response among USDA Agencies.
Requests for analyses related to proposed changes in USDA programs, policies, and
legislation come from the Secretary, other Administration officials, and members of
Congress.
The Office of Risk Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis reviews major regulations
proposed by USDA to ensure that they are based on sound scientific and economic analysis.
The Office also sponsors the Science, Policy, and Risk Forum, a series of four or more annual
seminars that feature prominent speakers on risk assessment and the intersection of risk
assessment and economic analysis to build capacity in risk analysis. The seminars address
emerging issues in risk assessment or economic analysis, new methodological techniques,
or other special topics of interest. The Office also occasionally hosts full- or half-day
workshops on topics such as cost-benefit analysis.
The Office of Pest Management Policy develops and coordinates USDA policy on pesticides,
biotechnology, integrated pest management, and related topics. Specifically, the Office
provides the Environmental Protection Agency and other Federal agencies with the most
accurate data available to help assure that pesticide regulatory decisions are based on
modern, realistic agricultural practices; reviews and responds to proposed pesticide risk
mitigation strategies; conducts surveys and analyzes available data to answer pest
management-related research questions; and communicates with stakeholder groups
regarding pest management-related regulatory decisions and policies.
The Office of Energy and Environmental Policy serves as a focal point for the Department's
energy, environmental markets, and climate change activities, conducting analyses and
assessments to ensure that USDA and the people we serve are positioned to meet future
challenges and opportunities. The Office coordinates policy analysis, long-range planning,
research priority-setting and response strategies for addressing energy development and
environmental policy.
The Farm Service Agency within the Farm Production and Conservation Mission Area
manages the Farm Loan Program Risk Assessment, the primary tool that USDA uses for
ongoing review and oversight of field office farm loan program operations. This assessment
examines the Farm Loan Programs using a data-driven, risk-based approach and provides
the framework for assessing program management and oversight of State Offices and
program delivery by Service Centers. The Federal crop insurance program is also
13
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
periodically evaluated and adjustments are made based upon evidence from these
evaluations.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BUILDING ANALYTICAL CAPACITY
USDA has identified several recommendations to strengthen analytical functions to support
evidence-based decision-making:
Strengthen the use of performance data in decision-making: The FY 2020 Management
Challenges report included a challenge related to strengthening program performance and
performance measures, noting that "agencies do not always have adequate reviews or
controls in place to supply the metrics necessary to [assess] programs." This challenge was
echoed in the GAO 2020 Federal Managers Survey: Results on Government Performance and
Management Issues, in which USDA scored significantly lower than the government-wide
average in a number of categories related to performance measurement, including using
performance information to identify problems, understanding measure definitions, and
communicating performance information. USDA may consider expanding its efforts to
integrate performance information into analytical functions to support decision-making.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the effectiveness of USDA's other analytical
functions.
Leverage the Data Science Workbench to improve analytical functions: USDA is in the
process of launching a Data Science Workbench that provides an expandable suite of tools
for performing analytics and data science processing (e.g., Python, ESRI, etc.), enabling
Agencies to perform complex analytics in a scalable cloud environment. The Workbench
allows users from across the Department to harness data from disparate sources to address
questions on program performance, evaluation, and research, improving business outcomes
and decision-making. The Workbench offers easy, widespread access to standardized tools
in an expandable suite, facilitates learning and adoption of analytics practices, and
empowers leaders and employees across USDA to make data-driven decisions.
If implemented, this recommendation would improve the quality and methods of USDA's other
analytical functions.
14
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Capacity Assessment Inventory
OBPA
developed the Interim Capacity Assessment in the fall of 2020 using a survey and Capacity Assessment template with criteria
outlined in OMB guidance and best practices from other Federal agencies. In collaboration with the Mission Areas and Agencies, OBPA
conducted a Department-wide assessment that consisted of three components:
Evidence Inventory: Comprehensive collection of all evidence-building activities broken down by type of evidence
(policy
analysis,
program evaluation, foundational fact-finding, performance measurement, and other), alignment to USDA FY 2018 - 2022
strategic goals, and audience;
Resources: Number of full-time employees and funding invested in evidence-building activities; and
Evidence Maturity Model: Mission Areas' assessment of their level of maturity in evidence-building activities based
on
an
evidence
maturity model adapted from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
The findings of the Interim Capacity Assessment indicated that the Department is currently operating at a low level of maturity on most
dimensions. This score was consistent with the results of the recent GAO 2020 Federal Managers Survey: Results on Government Performance
and Management Issues, in which USDA scored lower than the government-wide average for "evidence-building capacity and actions to
enhance it.'
In
preparing the final iteration of the Capacity Assessment, OBPA determined that this prior methodology for building an evidence
inventory was highly resource-intensive and did not necessarily result in meaningful data that could be effectively
leveraged
by
USDA
staff. For example, Agencies under the Research, Education, and Economics Mission Area required multiple months
to
compile
hundreds
of data points that captured all ongoing studies and analyses. Furthermore, it was unclear how the aggregated data from
across
the
Department could be utilized, if at all, by Mission Areas and Agencies.
In order to make the list of activities (e.g., programs, initiatives, etc.) and operations (e.g., administrative and support tasks) being analyzed
and evaluated across USDA as useful and relevant as possible, OBPA focused the scope of the inventory to those activities that align to
the FY 2022 - 2026 Strategic Plan. OBPA collaborated with responsible offices and programs to document the
current
evidence
base,
including ongoing studies and analyses, supporting each strategic objective. The purpose of this approach was to ensure that the inventory
provided practical, applicable information to the Mission Areas and Agencies that improves evidence-building capacity and supports
implementation of the USDA Strategic Plan over the next four years. As such, the inventory may be revisited on an annual basis or other
regular cadence and updated as needed to reflect the ongoing evidence activities associated with the implementation strategies in
support of the Department's strategic goals and objectives. This inventory is not comprehensive of all ongoing evaluations and analyses
but represents the highest-priority or most critical activities as identified by Mission Area and Agency leadership.
15
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Agency
Activity or Operation
Main Research Question
Brief Summary of Methods
Strategic
Goal
Using Robotic Process
How does the use of Robotic Process
Automation or Related
Automation improve the efficiency of
FNS
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
4
Technology in SNAP
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Eligibility Processes
Program application processing?
Assessment of Mobile
To what extent do mobile technologies
FNS
Technologies for Using
affect participant access to Supplemental
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
4
SNAP Benefits
Nutrition Assistance Program benefits?
Understanding the
What are the key factors associated with
FNS
Relationship Between
variations in food security rates in
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
4
Poverty, Well-Being, and
persistent-poverty counties?
Food Security
At the borrower level, what economic
Farm Loan Program Risk
factors influence borrower demand for
FSA
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
3
Analysis
Farm Loan Program loans, delinquencies,
and other risks?
Major Programs Including
What are the impacts of new farm bill and
Methods will include cost-benefit analysis, as well as
the Wildfire and Hurricane
other significant regulations on the
FSA
additional quantitative analysis using spreadsheets, SAS,
1
Indemnity Program Plus
distribution of program benefits and the
mapping, and other tools. Primary data sources are
and the Market Facilitation
overall costs to the Federal government?
administrative data from FSA and NRCS.
FSA has developed a portfolio of research
FSA is conducting analyses of alternative strategies for
questions related to its CRP program and
discretionary National program decision-making
major NRCS conservation programs,
Conservation Reserve
associated with the CRP and various NRCS conservation
including the Environmental Quality
FSA
Program and Major NRCS
Incentives Program, Agricultural
programs. Methods will include quantitative analysis using
1
Conservation Programs
spreadsheets, SAS, mapping, and other tools using FSA
Conservation Easement Program,
and NRCS administrative data. The CRP monitoring and
Conservation Stewardship Program, and
evaluation work involves $2 million in annual agreements
Regional Conservation Partnership
with USGS, ARS, universities, and others.
Program.
What are the government cost impacts to
changing the Agriculture Risk Coverage and
FSA will perform quantitative analysis using spreadsheets,
Agriculture Risk Coverage
Price Loss Coverage yield cascade?
SAS, mapping, and other tools to identify alternative
FSA
and Price Loss Coverage
strategies for National program decision-making
3
Programs
What types of yields should be used in
associated with the Agriculture Risk Coverage and Price
situations where missing county yields are
Loss Coverage programs.
an issue (e.g., plug yields)?
What are Commodity Credit Corporation
FSA will conduct quantitative analysis using spreadsheets,
10-year baseline projections for major FSA
SAS, mapping, and other tools to inform decision-making
FSA
Major FSA Programs
programs?
and maintain and enhance high-quality program
3
What are the most appropriate valuations
implementation. Primary data sources are administrative
for various types of livestock for
data from FSA and NRCS.
16
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
implementing the Livestock Indemnity
Program in any given year?
What are the most appropriate feed
coefficients to use in the Dairy Margin
Coverage program's calculation?
Over the past year, FSA staff have developed an Access
database to track foreign investment in U.S. agriculture
(acquisition and disposition of land by foreign country of
owner, U.S. State, and type of land [crop, forest, pasture,
etc.]). Prior to this database being developed, these data
Agricultural Foreign
Can systems be streamlined so that they are
were handled by a cumbersome system that involved
Investment Disclosure Act
FSA
easier to use, reduce resource needs, and
multiple databases and processes. With one simplified
3
Work
improve the timeliness of data delivery?
system residing in Access, program staff were able to
develop and deliver two reports to Congress (as required
by law) this past year, eliminating the lag in data reporting.
FSA will continue the refinement of data collection and
systems for in-house consolidation of Agricultural Foreign
Investment Disclosure Act work.
FSA will coordinate with NASS and AMS on data
What are key data and information needed
development and statistical activities as laws change or
FSA and RMA Programs
to understand the current State of the
new issues emerge related to the hemp market. Efforts
FSA
Related to the Hemp
hemp market, and what data should USDA
will focus on various FSA and RMA programs, including
3
Market
be collecting in order to support FSA and
crop insurance, the Non-insured Crop Disaster Assistance
RMA programs?
Program, Farm Storage Facility Loan program, and FSA
credit programs.
How can USDA better focus the
NRCS
Climate Change Mitigation
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP)
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
1
Assessment Initiative
toward climate outcomes to further USDA's
goal of addressing climate change?
APHIS will develop a science-based policy framework for
how to best identify and address zoonotic disease
How should APHIS prioritize future
Zoonotic Disease in
APHIS
surveillance activities for zoonotic diseases
challenges in livestock and other farmed animals. The
2
Animals
in animals?
Agency will pilot projects for surveillance of SARS-CoV-2
in farmed wildlife (e.g., mink) and conduct evaluations of
policy alternatives from full quarantine to depopulation.
APHIS will evaluate how to address climate change
Climate Suitability Maps
impacts on its programs. This includes the development of
How can APHIS address the impact of climate
for Priority Pests in Pest
technologies and tools to identify and mitigate impacts of
APHIS
change on the spread of pests and diseases?
2
Detection and Response
invasive species, pests, and diseases. Other methods will
Programs
include scientific literature and peer review, geospatial
analysis, risk analysis, and predictive modeling.
17
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
How can APHIS continue working with
APHIS will carry out a National Animal Health Laboratory
Zoonotic Disease
cross sector partners on impactful National
Network pilot project to monitor antimicrobial resistance
APHIS
Engagement, Investigation,
and international One Health strategies and
profiles in animal pathogens. Methods include formative
2
and Response
policies for Zoonotic Disease Engagement,
program evaluation, risk analysis, geospatial analysis,
Investigation, and Response?
strategic foresight, and process and performance reviews
APHIS will develop a plan for integrating more
Plant Pest and Disease
What phytosanitary treatment and/or
environmentally friendly treatments into its plant pest and
APHIS
strategy will provide effective protection in
disease response and import/export risk mitigation
2
Response
place of fumigation with methyl bromide?
measures. Methods will include risk analysis and scientific
literature and peer review.
AMS Transportation
What transportation related disruptions
Through one or more cooperative agreements with
Services Division and
exist as a result of climate impacts and to
Climate-Related
university partners, existing data and literature on this
AMS
1
what extent do they occur across various
topic will be analyzed through a variety of qualitative and
Disruptions to
modes (e.g., ocean, rail, trucking, etc.)?
quantitative methods.
Transportation Networks
What is the impact of these types of
investments on outputs (i.e., trainings
AMS will use standardized performance metrics for grant
delivered, food business plans developed,
programs as a local/regional investment measure for
new food products developed), outcomes
summary analyses and, if Centers are established, develop
(e.g., job creation, new market channels,
USDA American Rescue
a standard reporting rubric to indicate both outputs and
AMS
alignment of stakeholder groups, and viable
outcomes (also for summary analyses). Evaluation
2
Plan Investments
food businesses), and ultimately supply
strategies, such as social network analysis and/or ripple
chain impact (e.g., increased competition,
effects mapping, may be used to gauge the connectedness
increased access to local and regional food
of grants and/or the regional supply chains over time and
products, increased small food business
related impacts on speed of or impact of outcomes, if any.
activity, increased representation, and
diversity in the food system)?
AMS Fair Trade Practices
What methods or approaches is AMS using
AMS will monitor market prices and conduct
AMS
Program/Packers &
to support Fair and competitive markets for
investigations of alleged unfair and/or anti-competitive
3
Stockyards Division
livestock, meat, and poultry?
conduct in the livestock, meat, and poultry industries.
How does technical assistance for both
AMS is assessing its Organic Transit Initiative to facilitate
the transition to organic, including conservation practices
Organic Transition
transitioning farmers and organic
AMS
and climate-smart agriculture. Methods include tracking
professionals correlate with the number of
3
Initiative
geographic and audience-based distribution of technical
certified organic operations and compliance
assistance resources against growth in organic metrics
metrics across the industry?
and compliance statistics.
How does the publication of the Organic
Livestock and Poultry Standards and
AMS is assessing growth in the organic industry as a result
AMS
of rulemaking activities, using Organic Integrity Database
National Organics Program
Strengthening Organic Enforcement impact
3
and data from the Customs and Border Protection Import
organic market growth and visibility into
system.
organic imports?
18
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Can State and Tribal government agencies
more effectively procure agricultural
products that support local and regional
food systems, socially disadvantaged
AMS will use quarterly performance reports and a final
Local Purchase Assistance
producers, and underserved communities?
report submitted by recipients that will measure the
AMS
Cooperative Agreement
ongoing success of the Local Purchase Assistance
4
Program
Does the program foster relationships
Cooperative Agreement Program and the percentage of
between local/regional suppliers, socially
those relationships that will continue into the future.
disadvantaged producers, and underserved
communities that will continue after the
program ends?
AMS will assess Agency-wide implementation of programs
and services related to participant access, ease of use, and
What barriers exist to expand program
program integrity to increase diversity, equity and
access to underserved and
inclusion in areas with less than desired participation rates
AMS Staff Recruitment and
underrepresented communities?
in the AMS workforce and increase program participation
AMS
6
Selection Practices
What are the key factors associated with
and use by underserved populations. Additionally, AMS
successful recruitment and retention of a
will engage with cross-Departmental partners, including
diverse and inclusive workforce?
FPAC New and Beginning Farmer Coordinator, the Office
of Partnerships and Public Engagement, and the Office of
Tribal Relations.
Can AMS Grading and Auditing duties be
completed with relevant experience?
Program Administration /
Does requiring undergraduate degrees
AMS will conduct a review of position descriptions and
HR Personnel Grading
impact AMS' ability to fill Grading and
scope and complexity of duties, as well comparative and
AMS
Policies and Office of
Auditing positions?
6
statistical analyses of USDA as compared to similar
Personnel Management
Do AMS Grading and Auditing positions fall
positions in the labor market.
Policies
in line with positions of similar
grade/duty/responsibilities in the labor
market?
What are estimates of timber removals and
their consequential impact on the forests
Forest Service conducts Nationwide statistical surveys of
FS
Timber Removal Impact
and economies of various regions?
mill owners to determine how much land they own and
1
What are the locations, size, and types of
where.
mills in a given State?
Forest Service will review individual reports compiled by
U.S. Forests Status and
Are U.S. forests sustainable in ecological,
experts for 64 indicators of forest sustainability, based on
FS
social, and economic dimensions and in
Trends
a variety of datasets, covering topics ranging from
1
comparison to forests in other nations?
biodiversity conservation to forest fires to the many
benefits derived from forests.
19
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Where should Forest Service invest in
removing woody biomass from the
landscape to achieve the greatest return on
investment in terms of wildfire risk
Forest Service conducts modeling to inform trade-offs in
FS
Alternative Harvesting
Scenarios
reduction?
where to invest in land treatments and resource
1
treatments.
What are the trade-offs between harvesting
and hazardous fuels mitigation treatments
to reduce fire risk?
How might Forest Service better
understand private forest owners to
Forest Service conducts Nationwide statistical surveys of
FS
Private Landowners
improve collaboration?
individual forest owners and is working to expand the
1
Are underrepresented owners being served
survey to corporate owners.
in an equitable way?
What risk-based factors influence
Wildfire Suppression
Methods include in-person field testing and record
FS
management decisions with respect to
1
Operations
reviews.
wildfire suppression operations?
Methods include remote sensing-based disturbance
Are fuel management treatments
detection techniques, events data vetted by LANDFIRE
FS
Wildfire Suppression
implemented broadly enough, as well as
personnel, and cleaned by overlapping all the data sources
1
Operations
sited correctly?
and types to create a single unique event per year and
location.
Is allocating program funding using the
current allocation formula the most
Methods include compiling geospatial and tabular
effective use of program resources?
accomplishments on an annual basis report on 19
Effective Funding
FS
Allocation
different metrics as well as monitoring for implementation
1
What activities are being implemented
based on a statistical sample of Forest Stewardship
based on the recommendations in Forest
Management Plans.
Stewardship Management Plans?
Methods include a Nationwide statistical survey to collect
Is the Forest Service sustaining the health,
quantitative data (e.g., trees, biomass, or carbon by
FS
Changes in Forest
diversity, and productivity of the Nation's
species; forest type; biomass of dead and dying material,
1
Inventory
forests and grasslands to meet the needs of
soil carbon estimates, forest floor carbon; invasive
present and future generations?
species; and forest land area).
What are the status and trends in these
The Resources Planning Act Assessment includes analyses
resources?
of forests, rangelands, wildlife and fish, biodiversity, water,
outdoor recreation, wilderness, urban forests, and the
Assessment of Natural
How is climate change expected to impact
effects of climate change on these resources. Scientists
FS
these resources?
1
Resources
integrate findings and create projection models in the
What issues should be tracked for each of
various resource areas and write peer-reviewed
these resources?
summaries of status and trends. The final assessment
summarizes results for each resource area.
20
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
What are and how can rural and urban
forestry opportunities mitigate the buildup
of atmospheric carbon dioxide and reduce
the risk of global climate change?
What is the best available science to inform
an assessment of effects of the Northwest
Forest Plan on old-growth forest
ecosystems, including with respect to
Methods include qualitative and quantitative data
wildlife habitat?
collection, including interviews; scientific literature
FS
Analysis of the Northwest
What is the best available science to inform
review; collaboration between 50 scientists from Forest
1
Forest Plan
how old-growth forest ecosystems,
Service Research & Development, other Federal agencies,
including wildlife habitat and other
universities, and Tribes; and public input from
ecosystem services, Tribal values related to
stakeholders.
timber harvest, and socioeconomic well-
being, could be balanced with timber
outputs?
Recreation - National
What is the recreational use of National
For each ORV, the park resources experts determined at
FS
5
Visitor Use Monitoring
Forest System lands?
least one measurable indicator to track its condition.
How well does the workforce meet the
National Work
Methods include a confidential survey open to USDA
FS
intentions of the Forest Service Code and
6
Environment Survey
Forest Service Federal employees.
Commitments?
Methods include in-person reviews at Job Corps centers
conducted according to the Policy Requirement
Forest Service has developed a portfolio of
Handbook; surveys of students at graduation and six and
FS
Job Corps
research questions related to its Job Corps
12 months post-graduation assessing employment status
6
program.
and salary; Data collection on conservation work
performed by students and subsequent conservation job
placements; and cost-benefit analyses.
Fire Risk Reduction and
What information is needed to measure and
Using the ongoing work in Research & Development,
FS
Forest Service will identify data needed to measure risk,
1
Resilience Index
index fire risk, reduction, and resilience?
risk reduction, and resilience in firesheds.
What are the impacts of the broadband
programs on broadband availability, use,
USDA Broadband
and on economic (property values,
RD
household income, and employment) and
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
5
Programs
social (population growth, healthcare
access and availability, and telemedicine)
outcomes?
What is the impact of the Water and
USDA Water and
RD
Environment Program on water quality,
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
5
Environment Programs
property values (residential, agricultural,
21
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
and commercial property), income and
earnings, poverty, and population growth
across the rural-urban continuum?
What is the impact of Community Facilities
funding on rural hospital closings?
USDA Community
RD
Facilities Program
What are the impacts of Community
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
5
Facilities funding on education (i.e., school
quality)?
What is the impact of Single Family Housing
Section 502 Direct Loans on measures of
housing affordability and stability in
RD
USDA Single Family
recipient tracts or counties?
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
5
Housing Program
What is the impact of Single Family Housing
Section 502 Direct Loans on recipient home
values?
What is the collective impact of RD
USDA Rural Development
RD
program investments on the socioeconomic
See the USDA Learning Agenda for more information.
5
Programs
well-being of rural communities?
The Strategic Investment Mapping Tool can be used by RD
State Directors or Program Directors to understand the
present and historical location of investments in each
What rural communities are underserved
program or all programs. This tool can also be utilized to
USDA Rural Development
by RD field-based programs?
RD
target underserved areas to assure RD programs and
Programs
5
Where are the concentrations of need in
funds are being equitably distributed. The drivetime and
rural communities by State?
office location layers identify potential gaps in service
coverage. Program specific layers will aid the user in
better understanding the economic climate and natural
resources in their State or region.
Which rural communities are most at risk
The COVID-19 Economic Risk Assessment Dashboard
from COVID-19 shocks/disruptions (e.g.,
was developed to increase Rural Development decision-
sudden outbreaks shutting down local
makers' awareness of the relative sensitivity of the
USDA Rural Development
industry)?
counties our programs serve to the economic impact of
RD
5
Programs
COVID-19. This data will help identify areas of heightened
Where are the rural borrowers who are
economic and portfolio vulnerability during the pandemic
facing, or may face, significant economic
months and enable decision-makers to respond more
challenges caused by the pandemic?
quickly to the needs of rural communities.
RD will explore how it can measure and capture, post
USDA Rural Development
How do RD infrastructure investments
project completion, the impact of dollars invested on
RD
5
Rural Utilities Program
reduce greenhouse gas emissions?
reducing greenhouse gas emissions without creating an
unnecessary burden on recipients.
22
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
OCS supports research and programmatic advancements
How can OCS understand and identify
that aim to understand and identify forward-thinking
Pollinator Health and
forward-thinking strategies to ensure
strategies to ensure pollinator resiliency in the face of
OCS
pollinator resiliency in the face of
heightened climate-induced stressors and forage declines.
1
Habitat Conservation
heightened climate-induced stressors and
OCS will establish a new pollinator subcommittee within
forage declines?
the National Agricultural Research, Extension, Education,
and Economics Advisory Board.
ERS will conduct and publish multiple analyses and reports
What is the intersection between
on various aspects of the intersection between
Climate and Agricultural
productivity and climate change?
productivity and climate change. The Agency will also
ERS
1
Research
How can ERS improve climate change
conduct foundational work to enhance the scope and
models and needed data?
dimensions of data used in models to examine the sub-
national impacts of climate change.
How can the U.S. expand carbon
ERS will hold a workshop and draft a report on how the
ERS
Carbon Sequestration and
sequestration and woody biomass supply on
U.S. can expand carbon sequestration and woody biomass
1
Woody Biomass
limited new land?
supply on limited new land.
Economic Impact of Citrus
What are the various tools, methods, and
ERS will draft reports on tools, methods, and data on
ERS
Greening and Import
data for understanding citrus greening and
various aspects of citrus greening and its impact on U.S.
1
Competition on U.S. Citrus
its impact on U.S. agriculture?
agriculture.
What is the role of financing in the meat and
poultry processing industry?
ERS will produce case studies on the role of financing in
What are the short-run effects of
the meat and poultry processing industry; draft a report
Supply Chain Issues,
ERS
Distribution of Tariffs, and
retaliatory tariffs on different types of U.S.
on the short-run effects of retaliatory tariffs on different
2
farms and the distribution of Market
types of U.S. farms and the distribution of MFP payments;
Shipping Containers
Facilitation Program payments?
and draft a report on the shipping container market and
impacts on supply chains.
What is the shipping container market's
impacts on supply chains?
ERS will develop research questions to
ERS will draft reports on the declines in WIC participation
understand the declines in WIC
Research on Nutrition
and the role of social, economic, and policy contexts in
participation, the role of social, economic,
local communities (e.g., broadband availability and
ERS
Security and Food
4
and policy contexts in local communities,
adoption) and participation in WIC. The Agency will also
Assistance Programs
particularly broadband availability and
produce data products and draft a report on Inequitable
adoption and participation in WIC.
Food Retail Access and Nutritional Food Insecurity.
ARS conducts research to support USDA programs that
target local food production, development of new
Developing New Products
products, protection from animal and plant disease, and
ARS
and Uses from Food
To be determined.
keeping our food safe. ARS will implement research to
2
Byproducts and Waste
develop new products and uses from food byproducts and
waste and transfer technologies to farmers and food
processors.
23
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
ARS supports NRCS, FSA, and other USDA Agencies'
climate mitigation and adaptation efforts by quickly
High-Impact, Strategic
ARS
To be determined.
moving technologies and innovative practices from the
Innovations for NRCS and
3
testbed into practice. The Agency will initiate new
Other USDA Agencies
research targeting high-impact, strategic new innovations
that are needed by NRCS and other USDA Agencies.
ARS conducts research to support USDA programs that
Technologies and
target local food production, development of new
ARS
Research on new technologies and
Strategies to Detect and
products, protection from animal and plant disease, and
Reduce Food-Borne
strategies to detect and reduce food safety
4
food safety. Food Safety National Program research will
pathogens and toxins
Pathogens and Toxins
focus on new technologies and strategies to detect and
reduce food-borne pathogens and toxins.
ARS will establish an Interagency Agreement with FSIS to
address Salmonella illness; conduct priority research to
ARS
FSIS and FDA Activities to
address Salmonella foodborne illness; and participate in
To be determined.
Reduce Salmonella
FSIS, Food and Drug Administration, and Association of
4
Food and Drug Officials activities as subject matter expert
to identify next steps to reduce salmonellosis to reach
2030 Healthy People Goals.
The Census of Agriculture is critical in understanding the
demographic profile of farm producers. NASS will ease
reporting barriers to provide a more complete profile of
Interactive Portal for Data
NASS
What is the demographic profile of farm
the farming population; integrate this portal with
3
Providers
producers?
Farmers.gov; determine and implement authentication
process; and conduct end-to-end data collection activities
for a pilot survey and demonstrate the integration of
existing data collection systems.
The Agriculture and Food Research Initiative will support
projects to create more and better market opportunities
in the following program area priorities in the
NIFA will identify research questions to
Foundational and Applied Science RFA: Economics,
Agriculture and Food
create better markets and drive innovation
NIFA
Markets and Trade ($8 million); Food Safety and Defense
3
Research Initiative
in technologies and products that support
($6 million); Novel Foods and Innovative Manufacturing
economic growth.
Technologies ($8 million); Mitigating Antimicrobial
Resistance Across the Food Chain ($4 million); Diseases of
Agricultural Animals ($13 million); and Agricultural
Biosecurity ($6 million).
NIFA will identify research questions to
NIFA is investing in research, education, extension, and
NIFA
Nutrition Security and
advance USDA's goal to tackle food and
innovation to advance USDA's goal to tackle food and
4
Food Safety Programs
nutrition insecurity.
nutrition insecurity.
24
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
NIFA is investing in long-term climate change research
Research, Education,
How can NIFA advance innovation on new
through a National system of Agricultural Research
Extension, and Innovation
NIFA
crop and soil management systems,
Stations, supported with Hatch Act and Multistate
1
Through Climate-Specific
environmental monitoring, or breeding?
Research Programs funding for 1,862 universities and
Program Areas
Evans Allen funding for 1,890 universities.
Environmental Justice and
What metrics can be used to track the
OCS-REE will catalog all climate and environmental
Economic Opportunity for
benefits of climate and environmental
science programs supporting disadvantaged communities
OCS
5
Disadvantaged
science programs for disadvantaged
and identify metrics to track the benefits of such
Communities
communities?
programs.
USDA will combine Agency data in a Department-wide
tool that is standardized, automated, searchable,
Centralized USDA
dashboard-oriented, user-friendly, and high-quality;
OCS
To be determined.
Research/Researcher Tool
supports reporting on foreign influence, public access
6
compliance, impact tracking, and topical queries; fosters
synergy and reduces duplication; and links to publicly
available research products.
Nontariff Measures and
An FAS cooperative agreement with Virginia Tech and
U.S. and Global
University of Nebraska will develop a model for assessing
FAS
To be determined.
the costs, and potential gains, from non-tariff measures
Agricultural Trade:
3
restricting U.S. exports. A model that allows FAS to better
Developing A Framework
quantify the impacts of different policy options will
for Analysis
improve decision-making.
FAS will identify where to focus capabilities to meet both
Agency and Departmental strategic goals, as well as how
FAS can allocate resources and activities around the globe
FAS
Global Market Review
To be determined.
that maximize exports for U.S. agriculture. Fifteen
3
commodity teams will be formed to bring the entire FAS
Agency knowledge to bear when discussing high priority
markets for U.S. exporters based on macro, trade, and
demographic indicators, as well as policy expertise.
This research is primarily a desk review, funded by the U.S.
FSA has identified a portfolio of research
Agency for International Development and focused on
FAS
McGovern-Dole Program
questions related to the McGovern-Dole
countries in Africa. The researchers are using McGovern-
3
program.
Dole program monitoring data collected by implementing
partners, combined with third-party data sources.
25
U.S. Department of Agriculture - Capacity Assessment
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AMS
Agricultural Marketing Service
ARS
Agricultural Research Service
APHIS
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
CRP
Conservation Reserve Program
EAWG
Evidence Act Working Group
ERS
Economic Research Service
Evidence Act Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018
FAS
Foreign Agriculture Service
FNS
Food and Nutrition Service
FPAC
Farm Production and Conservation
FSA
Farm Service Agency
FSIS
Food Safety and Inspection Service
FY
Fiscal year
GAO
Government Accountability Office
NASS
National Agricultural Statistics Service
NRCS
Natural Resources Conservation Service
OBPA
Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCE
Office of the Chief Economist
OCS
Office of the Chief Scientist
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
SNAP
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
USDA
U.S. Department of Agriculture
WIC
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children
26
In
accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights
regulations and policies, the USDA, its Agencies, offices, and employees, and institutions participating in
or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national origin,
religion, sex, gender identity (including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital
status, ,family/parentalstatus, income derived fromapublicassistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal
or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not
all
bases
apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident.
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g.,
Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the responsible Agency or
USDA's TARGET Center at (202)720-2600 (voice and TTY) or contact USDA through the Federal Relay
Service at (800) 877-8339.Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other
than English.
To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form,
AD-3027, found online at How to File a Program Discrimination Complaint and at any USDA office or
write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form.
To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or
letter
to
USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C.20250-9410; (2) fax: (202) 690-7442; or (3) email: program.
intake@usda.gov.
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.
Issued March 2022
