USDA
United States
Department of
Agriculture
Office of the Secretary
Washington, D.C. 20250
TO:
Office of Management and Budget
White House Domestic Policy Council
FROM:
Thomas J. Vilsack Run of Velan
Secretary, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Dr. Jewel Bronaugh
Deputy Secretary, U.S (Department of
DATE:
February 10, 2022
fruis Bionaugh Agriculture
SUBJECT: USDA Equity Action Plan in Support of Executive Order (EO) 13985 Advancing
Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities through the Federal
Government
On January 20, 2021, the President issued EO 13985, which established that the Federal
Government should pursue a comprehensive approach to advancing equity for all.
In response, USDA took immediate action with a series of activities aimed to meaningfully listen
to internal and external stakeholders, understand where barriers to accessing USDA programs
and services exist, and assess data to identify opportunities to advance equity. Based on early
lessons learned, USDA staff offices and mission areas were directed to coordinate and develop
their respective key actions to comprehensively incorporate equity into farm, family, and food
programs that touch every American's life - including fortifying civil rights where
improvements need to be made.
The attached USDA Equity Action Plan details a subset of actions that USDA has chosen to
highlight because of their potential high impact for underserved farmers and ranchers, families
and children, and rural communities. While this is just a subset of many bold equity actions that
we will implement, these actions create the foundation that will inform and build other equity-
related strategies. USDA will institutionalize these strategies to become an organization that is
trusted today and by future generations. Our country is stronger when everyone participates, and
more vulnerable when people are left out. We know that people's frustrations run deep and are
rooted in their own daily battles - to make ends meet, to maintain their land, to put food on their
tables, and to see their children have a shot at economic opportunity. The increasing gap in
wealth and opportunities challenges the very core of who we are as a Department. USDA's
Equity Action Plan and other related efforts will make our programs benefit every working
American, particularly those who have been left behind. How we implement and make progress
over the next few years will determine whether our children will grow up in a Nation where
opportunity is real. We remain steadfast in our commitment to advance equity in every facet of
our mission.
Thank you for your leadership and support.
1
EQUITY ACTION PLAN
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (USDA)
BACKGROUND
On May 15, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln signed legislation establishing the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA). Two and a half years later in his final message to Congress,
President Lincoln called USDA "The People's Department." Today, USDA still strives to live
up to this name and become a Department that truly serves all people.
Unfortunately, since its inception, USDA has at times struggled to deliver its programs and
services equitably. All too often programs have been designed to benefit those with land,
experience, money, and education while leaving behind those without means, resources or
privilege of one kind or another. Over the course of decades, congressional reports, internal data,
civil rights investigations, court actions, and stakeholder testimony have documented this long
history of inequity and discrimination against farmers from underserved groups, most often
through institutional practices that administer credit and other farm support programs.
Because of the flawed design of programs as well as individual acts of discrimination, over the
course of decades, many underserved producers have lost equipment, land, farm operations, and
opportunities to train future generations of diverse producers. In some cases, they lost their
family home and valued links to their culture, history, community, and identity. These losses
have been devastating. USDA must both take accountability for its role in the precipitous decline
in the number of Black farmers in the United States and for erecting barriers that have kept other
underserved communities including Native Americans, beginning farmers and ranchers, veteran
producers, farm workers, and other underrepresented groups from full and fair access to USDA
programs and services, including but not limited to USDA farm programs.
As we move forward, USDA will continue to integrate civil rights and equity in the design of its
policies and programs that span the entirety of its mandate, including areas such as food security,
nutrition, natural resources and conservation, rural development, and more. USDA Food and
Nutrition and Rural Development programs are often and rightly lauded for their efficacy in
reducing hunger, poverty and improving quality of life in rural regions with investments in
critical community infrastructure such as housing, broadband, water, electricity, hospitals, and
schools. The reach of these programs is significant. For example, in fiscal year 2021, 41.5
million benefited from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and 9 million
kids were served with 1.6 billion school meals. And during the pandemic when low-income
families and children did not have reliable access to nutritious, affordable food, USDA increased
the Pandemic Electronic Benefit Transfer (P-EBT) by approximately 15%, providing low-
income families with additional money to provide meals to approximately 35 million children.
The impressive reach and efficacy of federal nutrition programs underscores the importance of
reducing barriers to access which range from cumbersome and inconvenient application systems
to old technology and paper-based systems.
Similarly, USDA's Rural Development programs are touching the lives of millions of rural
Americans and communities across the country. Despite progress to address poverty in America,
1
rural America continues to struggle to build and maintain wealth and opportunity in place. Even
with existing critical investments, disparities in economic, health, social, and racial outcomes
persist. Today, 267 of 310 persistently poor counties are rural and the rural child poverty rate
exceeds the urban child poverty rate¹. USDA Rural Development provides nearly $40 billion in
financing for housing, water, community facilities, broadband, businesses, and other critical
community infrastructure each year. But all too often, the households and communities that
most need these critical USDA investments face barriers to access. For example, complex
application processes for Rural Development programs can easily mean that higher capacity
communities with the resources to hire a grant writer or submit a sophisticated application often
win out over persistently poor communities.
Through the leadership of Secretary Tom Vilsack and Deputy Secretary Dr. Jewel Bronaugh,
USDA recognizes the damaging effects of systemic racism and discrimination that persist to this
day. It is USDA's commitment to take aggressive action to advance racial justice and equity
with a four-pronged approach.
First, based on stakeholder input and internal equity assessments, USDA challenged its offices
and mission areas to identify actions that will build and maintain trust, reduce barriers to access,
and increase USDA investments towards underserved communities. Each office and mission
area devised an equity action plan to which they will be held accountable for progress on a
quarterly basis. This USDA Equity Action Plan highlights a subset of the actions that our offices
and mission areas have committed to taking with an emphasis on high-impact efforts.
Second, recognizing the role of a healthy and inclusive organizational culture and the need to
build an organization that reflects the communities that agency serves, USDA is looking inward
to understand what it will take to build an organization that centers diversity, equity, inclusion,
and accessibility (DEIA) in all that it does. Immediate actions include the creation of a DEIA
strategic plan2 and hiring a Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer. These two specific actions are
not discussed in this report but will be detailed in a separate and subsequent document.
Third, USDA is establishing an Equity Commission comprised of external stakeholders.
Commission Members will conduct a thorough review of USDA policies and programs and
provide the Secretary with a set of recommendations for how the Department can take action to
advance equity. The Equity Commission provides a formal mechanism to ensure USDA
receives important input from a diverse array of stakeholders. The Equity Commission will
develop a report to serve as a vehicle to incorporate stakeholder experiences, perspectives, and
wisdom into a set of actionable recommendations. The Equity Commission and its
Subcommittee for Agriculture will provide an initial set of recommendations in late 2022.
Additional recommendations from the Commission's rural development subcommittee and any
other subcommittees will be provided no later than 2023. While the Equity Commission may
1
USDA Economic Research Service (ERS) 2019 Persistent Poverty Report: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/chart-sallery/gallery/chart-detaill?chartld=101781
2 To be developed in alignment with EO 14035 DEIA in the Federal Workforce
ttps://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/06/25/executive-order-on-dversity-equity-
clusion-and-accessibility-in-the-federal-workforce/andin support of OPM's Government-wide DEIA Strategy:
tps://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Strategic-Plan-to-Advance-Diversity-Equity-Inclusion-
 and-Accessibility-in-the-Federal-Workforce-11.23.21.pdf.
2
make recommendations that require Congressional action - where USDA has the authority to do
SO and assuming the recommendations are practicable and sound - USDA intends to take swift
action and will incorporate recommendations of the Equity Commission into USDA's Equity
Action Plan.
And lastly, the full implementation of the debt relief provision in Section 1005 of the American
Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) is central to USDA's strategy for advancing equity among a subset of
historically underserved agricultural producers. This provision provided USDA with
approximately $5 billion to provide loan payments to USDA direct and guaranteed loan
borrowers from socially disadvantaged groups. While this program is currently on hold due to
several court-ordered national preliminary injunctions, the USDA, the Department of Justice, and
the Biden-Harris Administration will continue to vigorously defend the program in federal court.
Foundational to our approaches and a key part of this Equity Action Plan is the underpinning of a
strong, trusted, effective, and efficient civil rights offices. USDA must uphold civil and
constitutional rights and must have a best-in-class Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights as well as top notch mission area and agency civil rights offices that ensure that all USDA
applicants, customers, employees, and stakeholders are provided fair access to all opportunities,
programs, and services. This includes the ability to target interventions and hold USDA
accountable to eliminate discriminatory treatment and provide appropriate civil rights
enforcement when complaints and non-compliance issues arise. Adherence to civil rights laws
and regulations undergirds everything we must do to lead the organization effectively and deliver
programs.
Concurrently, as a lead advocate for rural communities within the federal family, USDA also
worked closely with the White House and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to
educate colleagues across the federal government about the unique experiences and attributes of
rural and Tribal communities, why persistent poverty³ is predominant in these areas, and how
attention to the details of both policy design and implementation can ensure rural and Tribal
communities have equitable access to federal programs and services.
SUMMARY OF ACTIONS
With the background above in mind and in response to EO13985 Advancing Racial Equity and
Support for Underserved Communities through the Federal Government, this Equity Action Plan
details a subset of actions that USDA has prioritized and chosen to highlight because of their
potential for high impact on the underserved farmers and ranchers, families and children, and
rural communities. In planning for this Equity Action Plan, USDA first spent several months: 1)
Assessing and identifying challenges and opportunities through data and stakeholder
engagement; 2) Convening leaders across USDA components to discuss systems, practices, and
mindsets that hinder progress and activate a planning process to strengthen accountability and
ensure sustained change; and 3) Crafting equity action plans specific to each mission area,
agency, and staff office. Below is a summary of high impact actions USDA will take to advance
equity:
3 USDA ERS Distinct Rural Poverty Regional and Racial Patterns: https://www.ers.usda.gov/amber-
 waves/2021/august/rural-poverty-has-distinct-regional-and-racial-patterns/
3
1. Partner with trusted technical assistance providers: Building on investments made in
2021, USDA will partner with trusted technical assistance providers to ensure that
underserved producers have the additional support they need to access USDA programs.
This includes improved assistance and capacity for business planning, market
development, financial knowledge, and other technical skills involved in successful farm
management.
2. Reduce barriers to USDA programs and improve support to underserved farmers,
ranchers, and landowners: USDA will take steps to reduce administrative, economical,
historical, and other barriers to program access.
3.
Expand equitable access to USDA nutrition assistance programs: Building on actions
taken in 2021 to address the unprecedented levels of food insecurity and diet-related
associations with COVID-19 mortality as well as promote equity - USDA will further
expand access to its nutrition assistance programs to ensure that those who qualify are
able to participate, those who participate get benefits that are meaningful, and those who
receive those benefits can use them conveniently and in ways that promote improvements
in their health and well-being.
4.
Increase USDA infrastructure investments that benefit underserved communities:
USDA will make historic infrastructure investments and embed environmental justice as
part of the mission. By directing programs to develop policies and activities that ensure
USDA investments benefit underserved rural and tribal communities, this will also help
strengthen their ability to withstand the disproportionate effects of climate change.
5. Advance equity in federal procurement: USDA will assess and implement acquisition
strategies to increase opportunities for small and disadvantaged businesses to fairly
compete and access federal contracts.
6.
Uphold Federal Trust and Treaty Responsibilities to Indian Tribes: American Indian
and Alaska Native Tribal Nations are sovereign governments. USDA will take steps to
remove barriers to access USDA programs, and expand Tribal self-determination
policies, and incorporate indigenous values and perspectives in program design and
delivery.
7.
An unwavering commitment to civil rights: USDA will work to build civil rights offices
with the tools, skills, capacity, and processes essential to effectively and efficiently
enforce and upholding civil rights while also working to institutionalize civil rights and
equity in how the organization operates.
As USDA makes progress on the goals and actions articulated above, the Department will
simultaneously work to create new norms, practices, structures, and an organizational culture
that consistently and systematically places equity at the center of program design,
implementation, and evaluation. As previously mentioned, the Department will also provide
concurrent attention to creating an organizational culture that embraces diversity, equity,
inclusion, and access. USDA is off to a strong start using both discretionary and new authorities,
and historic investments that both ARPA and the Bi-Partisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act provide.
Over the course of the Biden-Harris Administration and beyond, USDA will develop and share
with our customers and stakeholders our progress in advancing equity. It is critical that we
4
continue to rewrite our narrative, remain steadfast in our public commitment, and advance
progress and change towards a more fair and equitable organization that will contribute to the
overall efforts of building a government that is trusted by those we serve. Our forward progress
will be documented via an annual accomplishment report that will reflect incremental outcomes
of this plan and other equity-related efforts. This annual report will be made available via
www.usda.gov/equity and amplified through stakeholder engagements with partners and
customers in the field and nationally.
USDA strives to institutionalize this emphasis on equity so that, with time, USDA becomes
known as a trusted partner that does right by underserved communities and thus live up to its
name as The People's Department now and for future generations.
EARLY ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Equitable Access to Nutrition Programs: Food Nutrition and Consumer Services (FNCS)
bolstered access to SNAP by providing $1.135 billion to expand and enhance the States' SNAP
administration and improve services to vulnerable populations; Increased Benefits for Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) Recipients by providing $900 million to implement a temporary
increase in fruit and vegetable vouchers to $35 per month. USDA also proposed a regulatory
priority to remove regulatory barriers in WIC's online ordering and expand access for various
types of online capable stores to participate. USDA also increased the Pandemic-EBT food
assistance benefit by approximately 15%, providing more money for low-income families and
millions of children missing meals due to school closures. USDA also expanded eligibility for
homeless young adults under the age of 25 to be able to receive meals at emergency shelters
participating in the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP).
Support to Underserved Producers: The Farm Service Agency (FSA) made available $67
million through its new Heirs' Property Relending Program. Heirs' property and other land
tenure issues have long been substantial barriers preventing access to USDA programs for many
producers and landowners, and this relending program provides access to capital to help
producers find a resolution. The program's benefits go far beyond its participants - it will also
keep farmland in farming, protect family farm legacies, and support economic viability. USDA
also announced approximately $16.6 million in funding to community-based and nonprofit
organizations, institutions of higher education, and Tribal entities that help underserved and
veteran farmers and ranchers own and operate successful farms. The Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) invested $50 million in partnerships to improve equity in
conservation programs_and USDA has invested $75 million in 5-year technical assistance
partnerships with cooperators that work with underserved farmers and ranchers.
Support to Underserved Communities: USDA Rural Housing Service's Single-Family
Housing Direct and Guaranteed loans (SFHDLP and SFHGLP) extended the eviction and
foreclosure moratorium to struggling multifamily housing residents. Totaling 218 projects, Rural
Business Service also made $86 million investment to improve equitable access to jobs, business
opportunities, housing and health care for people who live and work in rural communities
through six programs such as Delta Health Care Grant and Socially Disadvantaged Groups Grant
programs.
5
Partnerships with Minority Serving Institutions (MSI): The Food Safety (FSIS), Marketing
& Regulatory Program (MRP), Trade & Foreign Agriculture Affairs (TFAA), Research,
Education, and Economics (REE), and Office of Partnerships & Public Engagement (OPPE)
made investments to various MSIs to build programs that 1) enable minority students to have
access to curriculum, internships, and training that expand career opportunities in USDA-related
fields; and 2) leverage MSIs' ability to provide technical assistance to assist underserved and
veteran farmers to own and operate successful farms. For example, REE invested over $21.8
million to support research, to build capacity for teaching, research and extension activities, and
diverse student recruitment.
Improve Nation-to-Nation Relationship with Tribal Governments: USDA restored the
Office of Tribal Relations (OTR) and held an all-of-USDA tribal consultation in March 2021.
USDA also restored the protections to the 9.3 million acres of inventoried roadless areas on the
Tongass National Forest, returning stability and certainty to the conservation of the world's
largest intact temperate old growth rainforest. The USDA will also work with Tribes and Alaska
Native corporations in the area to develop sustainable opportunities for economic growth. For
example, Rural Utilities Service (RUS) obligated a $235 million loan to the Navajo Tribal Utility
Authority to improve electric service to the Navajo and Hopi tribes and deploy fiber-based smart
grid infrastructure. RUS also implemented no-match grant requirement for federally recognized
Tribes and other underserved communities. By doing so, it enabled low-capacity grantees to
have a fair shot at accessing financing.
For a comprehensive list of USDA's early accomplishments, visit www.usda.gov/equity.
EQUITY ACTION PLAN
PRIORITY ACTION 1 - Partner with Trusted Technical Assistance Providers
While USDA's expansive presence in rural communities is one of its greatest strengths, it is
increasingly clear that the decentralized, local nature of information sharing and decision-making
can be problematic, especially for underserved communities and non-traditional customers.
Agriculture is a complex industry with significant up-front costs including land, seed, labor,
fertilizer, and other inputs. In addition to assistance accessing affordable capital, producers often
need assistance with business plan development, tax planning, or simply navigating the
complexity of the financial institutions from which they are seeking to secure credit, be that
USDA or elsewhere. These challenges are compounded in rural communities of persistent
poverty where race and place combined have resulted in structural exclusion from financial
systems and other ladders of opportunity. Unable to access private capital, a producer may turn
to USDA for assistance.
However, while USDA's Farm Service Agency can provide access to capital, FSA has very few
staff and few programs that help with business planning or financial management. USDA's farm
loan program staff can help a producer secure a loan, but this requires a producer to have an
existing business plan and the ability to use a balance sheet to demonstrate appropriate cash flow.
This is just one example of how many farm programs have been designed and implemented for
decades in ways that favor and reward those who have access, means, prior experience and
6
education, and land and create barriers for those who are in persistently poor regions and most in
need of assistance. As part of its commitment to rebuild trust and better serve these
communities, USDA has pursued cooperative agreements with trusted stakeholder organizations
rooted in their local communities that are focused on improving business planning and financial
management services to underserved producers. Through these partnerships, USDA will commit
to provide technical assistance that ensures producers have essential knowledge, tools, support,
and information.
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
Applying for and accessing USDA programs can be complicated or intimidating
especially for beginning farmers and ranchers or those unfamiliar with USDA
programs and the organization.
Poorly defined terms in program rules and guidelines allow for significant discretion
from USDA personnel or county committees, which can result in underserved farmers
being denied program benefits.
o
For producers who are just getting started, financing alone from USDA is not
sufficient. Producers often need help and advice to craft strong business plans and
identify markets for their products.
o
Organizations that work with underserved producers and ranchers are often
underfunded and need support to learn and adopt best practices, run strong
organizations and to access and learn how to manage federal funds most effectively.
o
In theory, having USDA staff on the ground in offices throughout the country should
help, but going to a local USDA office in person is a barrier for producers whose
experience or impression of USDA is negative. Fear of discrimination or broad-
based mistrust are barriers to accessing USDA programs.
o
And, historically, USDA's Farm Service Agency and Risk Management Agency have
had very few programs and avenues for providing technical assistance and support to
either individuals or to organizations that help underserved farmers and ranchers.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
o
USDA continues to make significant investments in technical assistance to ensure
that underserved producers have the assistance they need to both access USDA
programs and to run a successful farm operation, including addressing access to land,
climate friendly farming, crop insurance, business planning, and market development
and access.
o
USDA will evaluate program regulations and guidance, identify inconsistent
implementation or excessive administrative burden, and propose/strive to adjust
policy and customer solutions that increase access and enable equitable delivery of
programs.
o
USDA will take a multi-pronged approach to providing this technical assistance:
- First, FSA, NRCS, RMA and other agencies will intentionally and consistently
dedicate funding from existing programs and budgets to technical assistance.
-
Second, USDA will deploy new, one-time funds from Section 1006 of the ARPA
via new programming that is designed specifically to fill gaps in existing USDA
programming and in response to specific, unmet needs that stakeholders have
articulated. $75 million in partnership agreements that USDA announced is just
7
the start of making these funds available. A forthcoming Request for Proposals
will soon make addition funds available to technical assistance providers. Efforts
are underway to develop and make additional programming available for land
access, assistance resolving land title and heirs' property issues, and to assist
underserved producers with market development and access.
-
In creating a cadre of technical assistance providers, USDA will focus on
investing in organizations that have existing relationships and a demonstrated
track record of working with underserved producers and who have built the trust
required to effectively provide producers with the support they need.
- Concurrently, to ensure USDA outreach, technical assistance and capacity
building partners are delivering these services with a high level of quality and to
build relationship and prompt coordination and collaboration among these
organizations, USDA will create and host a series of trainings for partners
organizations, to include civil rights. While these will initially be virtual, in time
USDA envisions an annual, multi-day, in-person training for a host of partners
organizations serving underserved farmers and ranchers.
These technical assistance providers will provide a gateway into USDA for underserved
producers and bridge the gap that exists between the organizational culture, demographic
profile, knowledge base, and relationships essential to meeting the needs and effectively
serve underserved farmers and ranchers.
Investing in technical assistance and collaborating closely with a host of partner
organizations is an important way to ensure underserved farmers and ranchers receive the
help they need now. Concurrently USDA will invest in its workforce to develop an
organization that has the staff, skills, programming, relationships, accountability, and
trust to do a greater share of this work itself in the long run.
C. Tracking Progress
o
Next 1-2 Years:
- In FY22, USDA will invest at least $100 million in additional partnerships with
technical assistance providers that serve underserved communities.
-
Design and launch programming will make new support available for issues that
disproportionately affect underserved producers such as land access, heirs'
property, and help with market development and access. Section 1006 of the
ARPA will guide and fund this work.
- Design the curriculum for and hold an initial series of trainings for USDA
partners providing technical assistance to underserved farmers and ranchers.
-
Set up evaluations of these efforts so there is data for continued decision making
down the road.
- Via the 2023 Farm Bill, work with Congress to make permanent programs the
components of the ARPA Section 1006 programming and technical assistance and
partnerships deemed effective.
-
o
Next 2-3 Years:
-
Institutionalize the emphasis on technical assistance with budgets and budget
proposals that include ample funding for partnerships.
8
- Formalize and ensure proper training for partner organizations and ensure there
are ample oversight and accountability mechanisms for ensuring the quality of
outreach, technical assistance, and capacity building efforts.
- Evaluate the extent to which technical assistance is effectively creating additional
access to USDA programs and services and the extent to which underserved
producers are getting what they need.
D. Accountability
FPAC is the lead agency expected to prioritize continued investment in technical
assistance funds in farm programs. USDA's Office of Budget and Program Analysis
(OBPA) and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) can play a
role in overseeing this commitment and prompting other Mission Areas to follow-suit.
USDA is accountable to Congress, the White House, and the public for effectively
deploying ARPA funds. The FPAC along with OPPE, OTR, the Office of General
Counsel (OGC), the National Institute for Food and Agriculture (NIFA) and OBPA are
all involved.
PRIORITY ACTION 2 - Reduce Barriers to USDA Programs and Support for
Underserved Farmers, Ranchers, and Landowners
Many small farms struggle without a meaningful safety net and it is even more challenging for
underserved producers who have experienced discrimination and had limited access to USDA
programs offered. In addition to working closely with partner organizations focused on
improving outreach to underserved producers, USDA will take steps to reduce administrative
barriers to program access.
A. Barriers to Equitable Outcomes
USDA farm program information and other materials are predominantly in English. The
language used to explain what is required of producers is often very technical. This
makes it challenging for underserved producers to understand requirements and to
successfully access needed financing.
Most forms and papers required to access USDA farm programs are paper based.
o
The computer systems that USDA uses are antiquated and rarely enable creation of user-
friendly interfaces that would be intuitive and simple for producers to use.
o
Many underserved producers have expressed issues with USDA's loan processing such
as cumbersome application requirements, lack of targeted technical assistance, and
opaque decision-making processes. This contributed to investment decisions that have
skewed away from producers that most needed help.
o
Most USDA farm programs are tailored to the needs of larger agricultural producers.
Historically, there have been few Farm Service Agency (FSA) or Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) offices in urban or suburban areas and few staff with
knowledge of the needs of producers in urban or suburban places.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
Translation & Plain Language: USDA will strengthen its translation services by
ensuring Limited English Proficiency (LEP) Plans for farm programs and improve
9
availability of LEP hotlines. USDA will also emphasize the use of plain language so that
its communications are easier to understand. Moreover, staff will be trained on various
tools and policies related to language translation, reasonable accommodations, cultural
sensitivity, and civil rights.
o
Customer Experience4 Initiative to Improve Application Process: USDA will work to
design and implement a simplified direct farm loan application process, along with an
online application option, to improve historically underserved producers' access to
capital through USDA programs.
o
Urban Agriculture: USDA will create targeted programs, offices, and resources to better
serve urban and suburban agricultural producers including creative support to those
taking actions in their communities, growing not only fresh, healthy produce, but also
providing jobs and offering access to fresh, healthy food in areas where grocery stores are
sparse. Historically, the lack of USDA offices and presence in urban and suburban areas
have been barriers to access, as has the absence of USDA farm programs that are aligned
with the needs of urban and suburban agricultural producers.
o
Heirs Property Relending Program: USDA will continue to implement the Heirs'
Property Relending Program that establishes loan funds to eligible lenders to assist
landowners to resolve ownership and succession on farmland with multiple owners.
o
Highly Fractionated Indian Land Loan Program: USDA will also implement the
Highly Fractionated Indian Land Loan Program with an evaluation of regulatory and
procedural changes to ensure alignment with the new Heirs' Property Relending
Program. This will ensure that title issues on land in Indian Country are addressed
concurrent to USDA's efforts to address heirs' property issues.
C.
Tracking Progress
o
Next 1-2 Years:
- Strengthen LEP plan and provide expanded access to translation services.
-
Train staff and make use of plain language the expectation and norm.
- Develop and pilot Customer Experience initiative within FSA to modernize
technology and create modern, user-friendly application processes.
- Stand up urban agriculture committees and develop new programming that aligns
with the needs of urban agricultural producers.
-
Ensure eligible landowners are aware of and have access to the Heirs Property
and Preservation Program.
-
Make progress towards addressing fractionated land issues in Indian Country.
o
Next 3-4 Years: Consider and implement the Equity Commission's specific
recommendations on agricultural equity. If new legislation is required, partner with
Congress.
D. Accountability
o
In strong coordination with OGC, all related deliverables and updates will be made
available via Farmers.gov, USDA.gov, and other online venues
4 Implementation will be supportive of EO 13571 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery
to Rebuild Trust in Government:  https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
 actions/2021/12/13/executive-order-on-transforming-federal-customer-experience-and-service-delivery-to-rebuild
trust-in-governument/.
10
o
The OASCR and Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA) will ensure limited
English proficiency and plain language standards are enforced.
Plain language expectations will be included in performance plans of agency leaders
PRIORITY ACTION 3 - Expand Equitable Access to Nutrition Assistance Programs
USDA's nutrition assistance programs touch the lives of one in four Americans each year and
offer the most far-reaching, impactful tool available to ensure equitable access to safe, healthy,
and nutritious food. To support health equity, USDA strives to ensure that those who qualify for
our nutrition assistance programs can participate; those who participate get benefits that are
meaningful; and those who receive those benefits can use them conveniently and in ways that
promote improvements in their health and well-being. Still, some equity challenges persist. In
fact, over 29 million adults and 12 million children struggled to afford food over the past year
alone, while more than 1 in 5 Black and Latino adults and children reported food insecurity. Of
USDA's nutrition programs, the Women, Infants, and Children Special Supplemental Nutrition
Program (WIC) participation rates have been in decline for more than five years. Currently, only
57% of eligible individuals participate in the program5. WIC plays an integral role in supporting
nutrition security for millions of families. Most WIC participants are people of color, which
makes WIC an important tool for addressing racial disparities in maternal and child health. For
this reason, while the Food and Nutrition Service will place a particular focus on reducing
barriers to access and increasing participation in WIC.
Sub-Action 1 - WIC
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
o
Persistently poor and underserved communities are more likely to have a difficult time
affording and accessing fresh, healthy, and nutritious foods. Food and nutrition status is
an important determinant of risk for obesity, diet-related disease, and overall health.
o
There are 12 WIC State agencies and all Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FMNP)
State agencies that currently use paper-based vouchers. This impacts WIC women, infant,
and children's participants, regardless of race and ethnicity. In FMNP the majority of
FMNP State agencies contract with technology services or banking entities to print,
process, and show redemption for the Programs' paper-based coupons.
o
Of the 12 WIC State agencies pending EBT implementation, eight (8) are Indian Tribal
Organizations with limited numbers of participants.
It is well-established that EBT provides for more efficient operations at the State and
local levels, and a streamlined shopping experience for WIC participants without stigma.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
On December 6, 2021, USDA FNS' Supplemental Nutrition and Safety Programs
(SNAS) and Supplemental Food Programs Division (SFPD) released the WIC FMNP and
Seniors' FMNP FY 2022 Guidance Package which set forth the process for FMNP State
agencies to pursue operational changes to their programs, including the implementation
5 To complement this USDA Equity Action Plan, USDA will also support gender and sexual orientation strategies
in
alignment with EO 14020 https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/01/20/executive
enting-and-combating-discrimination-on-basis-of-gender-identity-or-sexual-orientation/andin support
of the National Strategy for Gender Equity and Equality https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp
 content/uploads/2021/10/National-Strategy-on-Gender-Equity-and-Equality.pdf.
11
of an electronic benefit solution, and to seek applicable program flexibilities. The
guidance package provides instructions for FMNP State agencies wishing to request a
statutory or regulatory waiver under ARPA authority to test new and innovative models
of operation. Through the FMNP Guidance package, State agencies are provided with
resources enabling them to choose from several different options of coupon processing
operations, including e-solutions.
o
FNS will deliver a new grant program for state agencies that administer the WIC
Farmers' Market Nutrition Program (FMNP) aimed at modernizing benefit delivery and
reducing disparities in program delivery authorized under the authorization and funding
provided in the ARPA. The WIC FMNP Benefit Delivery Modernization (FMNP BDM)
Grants will be offered in multiple rounds and ongoing technical assistance will be
provided. As planned, $1 million to $5 million will be offered to state agencies in early
2022 for the first round of grants to support the modernization of FMNP benefit delivery
by supporting the transition from a paper-based benefit to an electronic, mobile benefit
solution readily available in the marketplace. FNS aims to formally open this grant
opportunity to State agencies via a Request for Applications (RFA) by February 2022.
C. Tracking Progress
o
Grantees will be required to provide narrative, semiannual progress reports as a condition
to accepting grant funding. USDA will also monitor program participation and impacts.
D. Accountability
o
In FMNP, the transition from paper-based coupons to an e-solution is a part of USDA's
FY 22 strategic priorities. During FY22, FNS will conduct monthly working group
meetings and make preliminary recommendations to modernize benefit access in WIC
FMNP while providing monthly progress updates to stakeholders.
Sub-Action 2 - WIC
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
o
WIC participants have limited shopping options. As the retail grocery industry has
evolved and adopted new technologies, payment methods, and online ordering, WIC
must keep pace. Participants in underserved areas may face more challenges when
shopping for their WIC foods depending on the availability of WIC authorized stores in
their communities. With about 45% of all pregnant and postpartum women, infants, and
young children eligible for WIC, the program has the potential to provide benefits to a
particularly vulnerable population.
Limited and/or negative shopping experiences may result in WIC participants transacting
less of their WIC benefits for supplemental foods. WIC participants are more likely to
have a more nutritious diet and better health outcomes, with participation tied to fewer
infant deaths, fewer premature births, increased birth weights, a reduction in health care
costs, and better academic outcomes for children.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
o
FNS is committed to increasing participation in WIC and reducing disparities in program
access and delivery. As part of the FY 2022-2026 USDA Strategic Plan, FNS's target
12
goal is to increase annual average WIC monthly participation by more than 350,000 over
the plan's timeframe. Recently, FNS convened more than 30 stakeholder sessions and
there was broad support for USDA FNS to increase awareness among the public on
WIC's benefits and services. Based on the feedback from stakeholders, FNS will develop
and implement a national WIC Public Health Outreach Campaign to increase awareness
of the health and nutrition benefits associated with participating in WIC. FNS will
evaluate the effectiveness of the Campaign at increasing WIC enrollment and participant
retention. FNS is also pursuing contractual support services for the campaign which is
authorized and funded through the ARPA.
o
The development and publication of the WIC Online Ordering and Transactions proposed
rule, to address key regulatory barriers to online ordering, as well as modernize specific
regulations that do not reflect current technology and facilitate the Program's EBT. In
addition, providing funding to WIC State expand the implementation of online ordering,
increased adoption of self-checkout, and collaborations with retail and other WIC
partners will address the known barriers.
C. Tracking Progress
o
USDA will monitor the successful implementation of WIC online ordering and
transactions subgrant projects; and increased adoption (number) of WIC authorized
vendors offering online ordering, transactions, and/or self-checkout options. For WIC
eligibility and coverage, FNS will be reviewing new methodological approaches. These
approaches will then allow FNS to revise estimates of WIC eligibility and program reach,
and gauge potential impact.
D. Accountability
o
All efforts to improve access and increase participation are in support of FNS' emphasis
on improving the consumer experience. Progress on these efforts is communicated to
internal stakeholders through monthly agency strategic priority reporting.
PRIORITY ACTION 4 - Increase Infrastructure Investments Benefiting Underserved
Communities
Underserved communities and populations are disproportionately impacted by the effects of
economic and environmental shocks. As the world continues to experience the impacts of a
pandemic and the devastating impacts of climate change, including drought, flooding, wildfire,
and increased severity of storms, these communities are often on the front lines. Historic
inequities have often left such communities and populations with low capacity to deal with these
challenges. In fact, two-thirds of over 3,000 counties in the United States are rural and 310 of
those rural communities have high and persistent levels of poverty. Rural communities are
generally closer to land and water, making its residents, housing, businesses, and infrastructure
more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Of the 310, 86% or 267 counties are rural and
concentrated in persistently poor areas of the Delta Region, Appalachia, the Southern Border
Region or Colonias, Puerto Rico and other insular areas, and on Native American lands. The
majority (60%) of people living in persistent poverty6 counties are people of color. Since
investments have historically lagged in these areas, their already vulnerable position is made
Persistent poverty counties are counties that have had poverty rates of 20% or greater for at least 30 years. For
more information, visit: https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45100
13
worse by the inadequate and affordable access to reliable infrastructure, public services, and
community economic development opportunities.
Through USDA's climate and environmental justice, the Department will drive strategic
investments by implementing the Justice40 Initiative to support increased resilience for
underserved communities and populations. Underserved communities embody a diversity of
population, industry, and assets. Therefore, the Department will employ a place-based approach
that delivers a suite of programs that can support both people's challenges and opportunities
while fostering a sense of place and partnership with trusted local leaders, meeting where they
are at, and in a way that makes sense to their overall culture and local economic needs.
In addition to directing benefits to underserved communities through the Justice40 Initiative, the
historic funding available through the Bi-Partisan Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act to
USDA will offer a once-in-a-generation opportunity for significant investment to drive benefits
to underserved communities and populations. Equity and environmental justice are fully
integrated in the planning of existing programs. USDA is committed to ensuring that the new
infrastructure funding are equitably invested in places with the greatest need.
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
o
The federal government makes billions of dollars available every year for community
and economic development projects and activities. For many rural communities,
particularly the most distressed, these resources can be difficult to identify and access.
Those first in line for federal resources are often more well-resourced communities
with experience navigating the federal government. Furthermore, the COVID-19
pandemic is exposing the limitations of the typical competitive grant model and has
shed light on gaps in access to resources to effectively meet the needs of rural
community members. The current availability of competitive financial program
resources is not enough to build equitable rural prosperity.
o
Communities applying for federal resources to implement community and economic
development projects often focus their proposals on immediate needs only. This is a
missed opportunity to design projects that meet both immediate needs while investing
in long-term strategies that support the sustainability of local economies and advance
tackle critical challenges like climate change that affect the prosperity of everyone
living in a rural community.
o
Underserved communities do not always have meaningful voices in the planning,
financing, and development of programs; therefore, they have been historically
vulnerable to environmental justice issues such as disproportionate impacts of
pollution and exclusion from the economic benefits of federal government activities.
Programs are not administered with the needs of such communities and populations in
mind, and therefore often are not accessible or responsive to their needs.
o
Over the past four years, USDA environmental justice capacity, infrastructure, and
responsibilities deteriorated with no nationally adopted policy and no standards for
agencies and programs to consistently implement and measure. There is a need for
structured staff capacity.
o
As rural communities continue to experience population loss, higher rates of poverty,
and lower educational attainment, the USDA's ERS is focusing its research on factors
14
that affect the income and poverty status of rural residents and their participation in
federal assistance programs.
o
If not addressed, programs will continue to fail to meet the needs of underserved
communities and populations, contributing to the disproportionate negative impacts
of climate-change and other economic or environmental shocks.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
o
Establish a Place-Based Model to Deliver Federal Rural Development Resources:
Rural places need new service delivery methods which are intentionally developed to
support their rural priorities and objectives. USDA will establish a place-based all-of
government model to ensure rural communities benefit from targeted partnership with
a collaborative network of multiple federal agencies and programs. This model will
provide communities with direct access to diverse resources where unique needs are
matched with the right support. Lessons learned will inform future federal rural
policy development and investment strategies and tools.
o
Fully Implement Priority Points in FY 2022 Rural Development Programs: Many
USDA Rural Development grant and technical assistance programs have the potential
to support long-term equitable rural prosperity by leveraging funding assistance to
key Administration priorities. As such, USDA is incorporating key Administration
priorities into Rural Development program scoring and associated funding
announcements beginning with the fiscal year (FY) 2022 funding announcements.
These priorities build upon RD's continuing commitment to serving traditionally
underserved and economically challenged rural areas, such as Persistent Poverty
Counties. The key Administration priorities are for projects that:
-
Assist Rural communities in recovering from the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, particularly disadvantaged communities.
-
Ensuring all rural residents have equitable access to RD programs and benefits
from RD funded projects.
-
Reduce climate pollution and increasing resilience to the impacts of climate
change through economic support to rural communities.
o
Implement Justice40 Initiative: USDA is part of the Biden-Harris Administration's
Justice40 Initiative, which sets a goal of delivering 40% of the overall investment
benefits from certain federal programs to underserved/disadvantaged communities.
USDA has mobilized a task force across the Department to identify a set of covered
programs, define the key benefits that should be increased for underserved
communities through those programs to the extent possible, and metrics associated
with each program. The Department is now in the process of developing a Justice40
implementation plan. This will include:
- Program Modification Plan: For each covered program, USDA program teams
will identify actions they will take to increase the benefits of the programs to
underserved communities and populations. The goal will be to begin
implementation starting Q2, 2022, if it has not already started.
-
Geographic Targeting Methodology: If applicable, programs will convey their
methodology for geographically targeting underserved or disadvantaged
15
communities, noting that USDA awaits guidance on the release and use of the
CEQ Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool.
-
Staff Training Plan: Agencies will formulate a plan to train state and local staff
to implement Justice40 program changes.
- Budget: Agencies will provide a plan on how to prioritize Justice40
implementation in FY22 budget (to extent possible), FY23 budget (to extent
possible - incorporate in pass back process), and in the FY24 budget planning
process
-
Stakeholder Engagement: Agencies will lay out a plan for ongoing stakeholder
engagement to inform program implementation planning and garner ongoing
feedback.
- Interagency Collaboration: USDA agencies will identify areas for coordination
with others in the federal family.
o
Update and Implement the USDA Environmental Justice Strategy: USDA will
employ a department-wide process to update the Department's Environmental Justice
Strategy as required by established policies and procedures. This will incorporate
Justice40 implementation and other Environmental Justice priorities to drive benefits
to underserved communities.
C. Tracking Progress
o
Next 1-2 Years: USDA will drive increased benefits to underserved communities
through its place-based approach and Justice40 covered programs and submit regular
metrics to OMB as directed. It will also update and finalize its Environmental Justice
Strategic Plan.
o
Next 2-3 Years: Based on lessons learned, USDA will modify or broaden this effort
to other programs across the department.
D. Accountability
o
Monitor application pipeline from underserved communities and track and report
investment annually.
Comply with OMB reporting requirements? on Justice40.
USDA will develop standard metrics that will be incorporated into the Federal
Environmental Justice Scorecard currently under development.
PRIORITY ACTION 5 - Advance Equity in Federal Procurement
USDA is one of the largest departments in the federal government both in workforce and
programs. If the spending of those dollars is carefully considered, we have the potential to make
tremendous impact in the recovery of our small businesses from the impacts of the pandemic
while improving our contract outcomes. Its ability to buy goods and services to deliver its
mission can also increase opportunities for small and disadvantaged businesses and support
closing the wealth gap in underserved communities. In support of implementing existing
authorities and new infrastructure funding and in alignment with the federal goal of expanding
7 White House Interim Guidance on Justice40 Initiative: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/07/M-21-28.pdf.
16
fair competition and equitable opportunities for small and disadvantaged businesses -
USDA
procurement offices will expand outreach, strategic acquisition planning, and meet annual goals.
By doing so, USDA will support small business growth and build generational wealth throughout
the United States, including for firms owned by underrepresented individuals.
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
o
According to a December 2021 White House fact sheet, less than 10 percent of
federal agencies' total eligible contracting dollars typically go to small-
disadvantaged businesses (SDB). At USDA, we have performed comparatively well
with an average of about 16% of contracting dollars going to SDBs over the last ten
years. However, given our purchasing power of about $9 billion, we can and will do
more than that.
o
Historically, the government wide contracting goal, as set and monitored by the Small
Business Administration (SBA) for SDBs has been set at 10%. In the prior
Administration, this threshold was the ceiling rather than the floor. It was also
deprioritized in favor of the perceived efficiencies of engaging in contracts with large
businesses and/or renewing existing contracts year over year. There has also been a
culture of failing to incorporate acquisition and procurement goals at the decision-
making and policy-setting levels of our Agencies. When SDBs are not prioritized
from the start of a new program, there are fewer paths towards expanding access to
our contracts.
o
Potential procurement partners from the small and disadvantaged business
community have consistently indicated that: 1) USDA acquisition opportunities are
too hard to find and too hard to understand; and 2) small businesses do not get early
enough visibility into contracting opportunities at the Department, often making it
impossible for them to compete with the larger companies who have business
development teams and larger staffs.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
Implement and roll out a 21.5% SDB contracting goal across the Department: To
achieve this higher-level goal, it will be proportionally allocated to each Mission Area
and strategic collaboration will be implemented with programs and procurement
community. This also includes integrating procurement goals in senior executive's
performance plans.
o
Make changes to our acquisition planning process: USDA will strengthen
Acquisition Strategic Planning, provide longer lead times, and increase involvement
and visibility for Office of Small & Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU)
and Departmental Leadership in addition to USDA's ongoing relationship with
program and procurement community.
o
Tribal Contracting: Review treaties, authorizing statutes, and regulations for
expansion of Tribal contracting preferences such as Buy Indian Act or Tribal/Native
American contracting preferences to USDA.
o
Targeted Outreach to SDBs: USDA will: 1) strengthen the use of GSA's forecast
tool to make our contracting opportunities more easily accessible and understandable;
2) develop a new small business landing page (https://www.usda.gov/smallbiz) to
17
make resources and opportunities easier to access and understand; and 3) require all
mission areas to be equitable in their procurement outreach and acquisition strategies.
C. Tracking Progress
o
Next 1-2 Years: By statute, the Department's progress and volume of contracting
dollars that go to small and disadvantaged businesses is measured by SBA in close
consultation with OSDBU in each Department. In addition to this standard scoring,
we have developed a detailed dashboard in consultation with the Chief Data Officer.
This dashboard breaks contracts down to the level of ethnicity of the business owner
and is refreshed in real time from SAM.gov.
o
Next 3-5 Years: While the SDB goal is reset every year by the SBA in consultation
with OMB, we can expect that over the next five years, that goal will sit around 22 to
24% for the USDA. One way of measuring success will be how close we are able
to
get to that goal year after year. Another way of how we will measure success is in
close consideration of our recently created dashboards. We want the percentages of
our small business contract allocations to more closely reflect the diversity of the
customers we serve.
D. Accountability
USDA will comply with SBA's standard reporting and grading process.
In addition, the Department's Contracting Deskbook will be updated to add policies
procedures on acquisition planning, forecasting, and reporting.
Procurement goals will be included in performance plans for USDA leadership.
PRIORITY ACTION 6 - Increase Tribal Trust and Treaty Responsibilities
In the last year, USDA has strengthened its commitment to Tribal nations. USDA has made a
commitment to fulfill its tribal trust and treaty responsibilities through removing the unique
barriers for indigenous and tribal access to USDA programs and services, promoting tribal self-
determination to enable greater self-governance and decision making, and adapting USDA's
programs to include tribal values and indigenous perspectives. Over the years, USDA's
obligations and commitments have not been consistently implemented. Historic discriminatory
practices as well as not honoring treaties has led to an erosion of trust with Tribal communities
and inequitable program delivery. USDA is making a strong commitment to reduce barriers
faced by Tribal nations, expand tribal self-determination, and incorporate indigenous values in
our programs.
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
Within USDA programs, lack of consideration of the unique legal status of tribes, tribal
jurisdiction, and tribal trust land status into USDA regulations and policies has
significantly hindered access to a wide berth of USDA programs for tribes and Native
Americans.
o
Regarding federal lands under our stewardship, USDA land management agencies have
exhibited an inconsistent mastery of tribal treaties and knowledge of the tribal trust
responsibility.
18
o
The lack of full consideration of the unique status of tribes has hindered economic
development and undermined tribal jurisdiction and self-determination, which has
contributed to economic uncertainty and underinvesting in tribal areas.
o
These barriers have resulted in inconsistent enforcement and protection of tribal treaty
rights and incorporation of indigenous values regarding federal lands.
o
Based on program data, historical discrimination, and civil rights cases, and through
numerous Tribal consultations, USDA received feedback on the shortcomings of program
delivery and other program inequities affecting Tribal nations.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
o
Reduce Barriers to access.
- Ensure Tribal Lands are Eligible for USDA Programs. There is inconsistency
across USDA in how tribal trust lands are classified (as federal lands or not) and
treated for purposes of identifying who the "owner" is. The result is the primary
manner tribes/Native Americans own land, in trust, is being deemed ineligible.
-
Ensure Tribal-Owned Entities are Eligible for USDA Programs. Tribal nations
have no tax base and usually participate in the private marketplace to generate
governmental revenue. They create wholly government-owned tribal
corporations. These corporations are a hybrid, they are both governmental and
"commercial." We struggle with categorization and therefore eligibility of Tribal
Owned Corporations.
-
Remove "Legacy" Preferences on Tribal Lands. Historically USDA funds
projects on Indian reservations without permission of the Tribe, and then
prioritizes that legacy borrower for future financing. This has resulted in shutting
tribes out serving their own nations.
-
Consistently Enforce Tribal Treaties/Statutes. It has been challenging to adhere
to the treaty obligations without easy access to the applicable treaties. OTR and
DOI-BIA are funding a searchable/indexed publicly accessible Treaty Database.
USDA will also work on treaty trainings and hiring additional expertise.
- Institutionalize Tribal Jurisdiction/Sovereignty Over Tribal Lands. Tribes have
civil/regulatory jurisdiction over their lands. USDA has historically not
incorporated this into our programs. We are beginning with requiring tribal
resolutions of support.
-
Improve Tribal Contracting. USDA purchasing and distribution
policies/practices to buy and distribute Indigenous foods in smaller batches and
seasonal purchasing to more targeted clients. Review tribal contracting
preferences.
- Improve Hiring for Tribal Facing Positions. Due to the complexities of federal
hiring, USDA has predominantly been hiring for Tribal related positions from
only within USDA, effectively shutting out Tribal citizens and experts in Tribal
issues with appropriate skillsets from applying. A new advisory streamlining
processes targeted to bring in new and appropriately skilled talent has been
issued.
o
Expand Tribal Self-Determination Policies.
-
Forest Service. Ensure that Tribal governments have an integral role in decision-
making related to the management of Federal lands, including the promotion of
19
co-management and co-stewardship opportunities. Incorporate traditional values
and perspectives in management decisions and enhance the protection of sacred
sites and resources.
-
Food and Nutrition. The 2018 Farm Bill authorizes USDA's Forest Service and
Food and Nutrition Service to enter into self-determination demonstration projects
for the first time. The first set of tribal demonstration projects, announced on
November 1, are important steps to increase tribal food sovereignty and support
tribal food economies.
-
Statutory Review. Importantly, USDA will also review current statutory
authorities, regulations, and policies that can be used to promote tribal
sovereignty and self-determination throughout USDA, with an eye towards
expansion.
o
Incorporate Indigenous Values and Perspectives.
-
Indigenous Food Sovereignty Initiative8: USDA will promote traditional food
ways, Indian Country food and agriculture markets, and Indigenous health
through foods tailored to American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) dietary needs.
- Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK). USDA will identify the
appropriate positions, tailor the job descriptions, and hire within each agency
expertise in ITEK.
C. Tracking Progress
o
Next 1 - 2 years: Identify clear paths for removal of each barrier. Implement and
incorporate FDPIR and FS tribal demonstration pilots and resolve identified issues;
stabilize a permanent self-determination office. Identify areas for incorporation of
indigenous values and positions in each agency.
o
Next 3-5 years: Implement the appropriate policy, regulation, or statute to remove each
barrier. Expand tribal pilot participation by 30% with increased outreach and funding.
Hire ITEK positions in each agency.
D. Accountability
o
We will hold an annual all-of-USDA tribal consultation and report out on equity and
barriers. Reporting to Tribal nations what barriers we have identified and what progress
has been made. Holding ourselves directly accountable to our tribal nations.
o
Establish a governance and reporting structure for the actions taken to remove each
barrier identified in this plan. This structure will be led by the Chief of Staff in
partnership with OTR and will require each affected USDA entity to demonstrate the
actions taken and results to-date toward achievement of the objective.
8 USDA is partnering with tribal-serving organizations to reimagine federal food and agriculture programs from an
indigenous perspective and inform future USDA programs and policies. For more information, visit:
https://www.usda.gov/tribalrelations/usda-programs-and-services/usda-indigenous-food-sovereignty-initiative
20
PRIORITY ACTION 7 - Upholding Civil Rights and Institutionalizing Civil Rights and
Equity as part of the DNA and culture of USDA
USDA has a long history of being on the wrong side of civil rights. From systemic
discrimination in program design to a failure to properly investigate and resolve complaints of
discrimination in its programs, numerous internal and external reports have documented
fundamental failures to protect the civil rights of USDA customers. Due in part to these failures,
thousands of minority farmers filed various class action lawsuits under the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), and USDA's Office of
Civil Rights has been challenged to maintain trust among both internal and external stakeholders.
Under Secretary Vilsack's leadership during the Obama Administration, USDA acknowledged
this history and took steps to chart a new era for Civil Rights at the Department. As an initial
step toward reckoning with the past, USDA worked with Congress and the Department of Justice
to settle the In re Black Farmers Discrimination Litigation (Pigford 2) and Keepseagle class
actions, to provide a voluntary claims settlement program for farmers and ranchers in the Garcia
and Love cases, and to make available over $2 billion for cash relief, tax relief, debt relief, and
capacity building programs for claimants. While there was progress towards making civil rights
foundational to USDA policies, programs, and culture, much of this has been undermined over
the past five years through budget cuts, arbitrary reorganizations of the USDA Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) and Mission Area offices that diminished the
capacity to perform core civil rights functions, and executive actions that banned diversity
training and special emphasis programs.
The Biden-Harris Administration, Secretary Vilsack, and Deputy Secretary Bronaugh have made
upholding civil and constitutional rights and ensuring that all USDA applicants, customers,
employees, and stakeholders are provided fair access to all opportunities, programs, and services
a top priority and foundational to the USDA equity agenda. This commitment includes
promoting, upholding, and enforcing civil rights in an effective, efficient manner and
institutionalizing civil rights as part of USDA's culture and norms. This commitment will also be
mirrored and included in the upcoming DEIA plan as USDA acknowledges the criticality of
supporting and ensuring civil rights for all, including our internal customers.
A. Barrier to Equitable Outcome(s)
Civil rights complaints that are not processed efficiently and effectively erode trust in the
systems that are intended to protect civil rights and stakeholders' faith in USDA's
commitment to civil rights.
o
The OASCR faces consistent staffing limitations and needs a broader set of competencies
(e.g., data science, law, program evaluation) so the office has the skills and capacity it
needs to deliver on its mission; Mission Area offices of civil rights are not consistently
empowered nor coordinated with one another and OASCR.
o
Underinvestment in human capital, the lack of coordination in linking program
performance metrics to data-driven civil rights impacts, and the proper training of USDA
staff in the skills and competencies needed have hampered civil rights teams across the
department and resulted in a workforce that needs more education and more avenues for
upholding civil rights and advancing equity.
21
o
The skills and processes to properly investigate and resolve programmatic complaints
differ substantially from the skills and processes required to process equal employment
opportunity complaints.
o
USDA has not made the necessary connections between its civil rights specialists and
individuals with programmatic expertise to support OASCR's work. There is a chasm
between programmatic complaints and program design. As a result, information on
systemic and structural problems with USDA programs and services that are discovered
via program complaints too rarely inform training, staffing, budget, program, and policy
decisions.
o
The approach and tools that USDA uses to assess programs and evaluate leaders to hold
them accountable are reactive, so they are of limited use in creating a culture that
proactively embraces civil rights as part and parcel of policy work and enables policy
makers to identify potential impacts, barriers, and changes before they occur; these tools
need to be revised.
o
Data that would enable program evaluation and help USDA understand the implications
of its programs and policies at a macro level often is not collected and where it is
collected there is not always enough knowledge of data science and evaluation to put the
data to use.
o
There are not consistent ways for stakeholder input and recommendations provided to
civil rights staff to be integrated into both strategic and operational decisions on policy,
program design, and implementation.
B. Action and Intended Impact on Barrier
Resolve long-standing pending administrative cases to rebuild and maintain trust.
Address the staffing and capacity needs of both the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights and Mission Area and Agency civil rights offices. Ensuring offices are
appropriately staffed and staff have the skills, tools, knowledge, and the support they
need to perform their duties is essential to the basic function of USDA civil rights offices.
o
Assess the 2018 OASCR proposed rule and associated internal management realignment
actions that created ambiguity around roles and responsibilities for Mission Area and
Agency civil rights offices. This will enable Mission Area and Agency civil rights staff
to execute their mission and be more involved both in ensuring accountability for civil
rights violations and ensuring that decision-makers at the Mission Area and Agency level
understand the civil rights impacts of program and policy choices.
o
Prioritize training on civil rights, equity, and other core competencies critical to reducing
barriers to access and crafting equitable policies and programs for USDA staff and
leaders within civil rights and throughout the Department. This knowledge is essential to
building an agency that deeply values civil rights and ensures equity is at the center of
policy and practice.
o
Devise systems that ensure programmatic complaints are mitigated - and when they
occur - processed efficiently and effectively and translate into recommendations for
changes in policies and programs that Mission Area and Staff Office leaders can put into
action to improve USDA programs in real time.
o
Assess how existing mechanisms for holding programs and USDA leaders accountable
for civil rights can be built upon to institutionalize a culture of civil rights and proactively
address civil rights and equity in policy design and implementation.
22
o
Collect data that would enable USDA to conduct analyses that shed light on the extent to
which programs are upholding civil rights and advancing equity; expand capacity within
key program divisions to obtain and analyze data; create systems for external evaluation
of USDA programs with civil rights and equity at the core of that analysis.
o
Create systems that provide consistent, intentionally designed, and well-executed
opportunities to collect customer input on USDA program delivery and customers
interactions with USDA and ensure the information gathered reaches policy and program
staff in a way that enables that staff to act on the information provided.
C. Tracking Progress
o
Next 1 - 2 years: Complete assessment and budget alignment.
o
Make progress on complaint processing. Make steps towards having a "model EEO9"
program as measured by the EEOC and the Management Directive 715 report. Craft a
new Departmental Regulation governing programmatic complaints as well as the
complaint processing departmental manual.
o
Deliver high-quality training for both civil rights staff and USDA staff on the broad
range of competencies and skills that each need to uphold civil rights and advance
equity in ways appropriate to the roles and responsibilities staff in different parts of
the organization hold.
o
Review existing accountability tools to determine how they can be modernized to be
more forward looking and proactive as well as how their design could provide
program staff with important information about civil rights and equity earlier in the
program development and implementation process.
o
Listen to stakeholders and collect stakeholder input via a civil rights conference in
2022 and as part of design of OASCR's updated strategic plan.
o
Next 3-4 years: Implement and evaluate structural improvements.
o
Build on progress made and lessons learned via the activities undertaken in years 1-2.
We anticipate a greater emphasis on discovery and process improvement in years 1-2
and more emphasis on implementation in years 3-4
D. Accountability
o
Over the years, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and Office of Inspector
General (OIG) have issued reports and continue to monitor progress towards findings.
USDA will continue to address those findings and recommendations and regular
reporting. Further, OASCR will continue to create a community of practice internally
with the Civil Rights Directors and community to ensure learnings are applied and a
culture of continuous improvement is built.
o
Through ongoing stakeholder engagement and annual accomplishment report to be made
available via www.usda.gov/equity, USDA will hold itself publicly accountable and
make progress transparent.
o
USDA will also convene civil rights offices from across the federal government to
discuss common challenges and learn from best practices.
9 Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) and Civil Rights Laws and Authorities: https://www.usda.gov/oascr/civil-
right-laws-authorities
23
