Department of Veterans Affairs
Fiscal Years 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Section 508 Compliance Statement: The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is committed to making its
electronic and information technologies accessible to individuals with disabilities in accordance with
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act (Title 29 U.S.C. § 794d), as amended in 1999. For further
information, questions or comments related to this document accessibility, contact the VA 508 Office at
section508@va.gov.
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STAITS
LETTER FROM THE SECRETARY
When someone signs up to serve our country in the military,
we make them a simple promise: if you serve us, we will
serve you when you transition out of the service. That
promise dates back to President Lincoln's second inaugural
when he charged a wounded Nation to care for those "who
shall have borne the battle" and for their families and
survivors. That promise echoes into today when President
Biden reminds us that our Nation's "most sacred obligation"
is to prepare and equip the troops we send into harm's way
and to care for them and their families when they return
home. There is no more noble mission than keeping that
fundamental, enduring promise and it is our job at the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to do exactly that.
Today, VA is keeping that promise by providing more care, more services and more
benefits to more Veterans than ever before-but, of course, we cannot stop here. We need
to fight every day to build a stronger, better VA for Veterans, their families, caregivers and
survivors because they deserve nothing less than the very best.
This strategic plan guided by VA's four fundamental principles-access, advocacy,
outcomes and excellence-sets VA's four strategic goals to achieve by 2028.
1. VA will consistently communicate with our customers and partners to assess and
maximize performance, evaluate needs and build long-term relationships and trust;
2. VA will deliver timely, accessible and high-quality benefits, care and services to
meet the unique needs of Veterans and all those we serve;
3. VA will build and maintain trust with Veterans, their families, caregivers and
survivors-as well as our employees and partners-through proven stewardship,
transparency and accountability; and
4. VA will strive toward excellence in all business operations-including governance,
systems, data and management-to improve experiences, satisfaction rates,
accountability and security for Veterans.
These goals will drive everything we do, beginning with our core responsibilities of
providing Veterans with timely, world-class health care; to ensuring that they and their
families have access to the benefits they earned; and finally, to honoring our Veterans with
a final resting place that is a lasting tribute to their service and sacrifice.
This strategic plan will help us execute our mission of serving Veterans, their families,
caregivers and survivors as well as they have served us. We will stop at nothing to meet
our goals and in doing so we will keep our promise to all those we serve.
I fully embrace this mission as does VA's workforce. May God bless our Nation's troops,
Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors and may we always give them our best.
/s/ Denis McDonough
ii
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STAITES
Contents
Department of Veterans Affairs Fiscal Years 2022-28 Strategic Plan
i
LETTER FROM THE SECRETARY
ii
INTRODUCTION
1
VA'S FOUR FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
2
ABOUT VA
4
ORGANIZATION
5
CORE VALUES, CORE CHARACTERISTICS AND CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE
PRINCIPLES
7
Core Values
8
Core Characteristics
8
Customer Experience Principles
9
ABOUT OUR VETERANS
9
VA FY 2022-28 STRATEGIC PLAN
11
STRATEGIC GOAL 1: VA consistently communicates with its customers and
partners to assess and maximize performance, evaluate needs and build long-
term relationships and trust
14
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.1: (Consistent and Easy to Understand Information)
VA and partners use multiple channels and methods to ensure information about
benefits, care and services is clear and easy to understand and access.
14
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.2: (Lifelong Relationships and Trust) VA listens to
Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors, Service members, employees and
other stakeholders to project future trends, anticipate needs and deliver effective
and agile solutions that improve their outcomes, access and experiences.
17
STRATEGIC GOAL 2: VA delivers timely, accessible, high-quality benefits, care
and services to meet the unique needs of Veterans and all eligible beneficiaries
21
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.1: (Underserved, Marginalized and At-Risk
Veterans) VA emphasizes the delivery of benefits, care and services to
underserved, marginalized and at-risk Veterans to prevent suicide and
homelessness, improve their economic security, health, resiliency and quality of
life and achieve equity.
22
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.2: (Tailored Delivery of Benefits, Care and Services
Ensure Equity and Access) VA and partners will tailor the delivery of benefits
and customize whole health care and services for the recipient at each phase of
their life journey.
35
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.3: (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Accessibility (I-DEA))
VA will enhance understanding of Veteran needs and eliminate disparities and
barriers to health, improve service delivery and opportunities to enhance
Veterans' outcomes, experiences and quality of life.
49
iii
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.4: (Innovative Care) VA will improve understanding
of Veteran specific illnesses and injuries to develop and adopt innovative new
treatments that prevent future illness and enhance Veteran outcomes.
53
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.5: (Value and Sustainability) VA, with community
partners, will deliver integrated care and services, balancing resources to ensure
sustainability while continuing to deliver value and improve health and well-being
outcomes of Veterans.
61
STRATEGIC GOAL 3. VA builds and maintains trust with Stakeholders through
proven stewardship, transparency and accountability
69
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3.1: (VA is Transparent and Trusted) VA will be the
trusted agent for service and advocacy for our Nation's heroes, caregivers,
families, survivors and Service members to improve their quality of life and
ensure end of life dignity.
69
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3.2: (Internal and External Accountability) VA will
continue to promote and improve organizational and individual accountability and
ensure a just culture.
71
STEWARDSHIP GOAL 4. VA ensures governance, systems, data and
management best practices improve experiences, satisfaction, accountability and
security.
77
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.1: (Our Employees Are Our Greatest Asset) VA
will transform its human capital management capabilities to empower a
collaborative culture that promotes information sharing, diversity, equity and
inclusion and a competent, high-performing workforce to best serve Veterans
and their families.
77
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.2: (Data is a Strategic Asset) VA will securely
manage data as a strategic asset to improve VA's understanding of customers
and partners, drive evidence-based decision-making and deliver more effective
and efficient solutions.
82
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.3: (Easy Access and Secure Systems) VA will
deliver integrated, interoperable, secure and state-of-the-art systems to ensure
convenient and secure access and improve the delivery of benefits, care and
services.
86
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.4: (Evidence Based Decisions) VA will improve
governance, management practices and make evidence-based decisions to
ensure quality outcomes and experiences and efficient use of resources.
92
APPENDICES
103
Appendix A: VA Quadrennial Strategic Planning Process and Stakeholder
Consultations
103
Bottom-Up Approach
103
Top-Down Leadership Input
106
Stakeholder Consultation
106
Appendix B: FY 2022-23 Agency Priority Goals
108
iv
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STAITES
Suicide Prevention
108
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, Accessibility
108
Rural Health Workforce
109
Expanding Connected Care
109
Caregiver Support Program
110
Appendix C: Strategic Plan Environmental Influences and Supporting Data
111
External Influences
111
Internal Influences
115
Appendix D. FY 2022-28 Learning Agenda
132
Background and Approach
133
Topic Selection Criteria
133
Learning Agenda Topics
136
VBA Learning Agenda
137
VHA Learning Agenda
150
Appendix E: FY 2022-28 Capacity Assessment
163
Background and Approach
164
Current Evaluation/Evidence-Building and Use Activities
164
Obtaining Insights about Evidence/Statistics/Evaluation/Research Capacity
Across VA
168
Capability Gap Findings
170
Capability Gaps
171
Gap Fill Activities
176
Addenda to Appendix E: Capacity Assessment Detail
183
Addendum A: VA Department-wide
183
Addendum B: Veterans Benefits Administration
190
Addendum C: Veterans Health Administration
195
Addendum D: Overview of VA Evaluation Activities
204
Appendix F: Strategic Planning and Risk
207
Appendix G: Acronym Glossary of Terms
210
Appendix H: Veteran Experience Office Journey Maps
215
Appendix I: VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan Poster
217
Appendix J: References
218
V
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
INTRODUCTION
On March 4, 1865, during his second inaugural address, President Abraham Lincoln
described his vision for national reconciliation and mission to bind the wounds and heal a
Nation torn apart from a lengthy civil war. In 1959, President Lincoln's immortal words
became the motto of the Veterans Affairs Administration, now the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA or Department) and stand today as a solemn reminder of VA's
commitment to care for those injured in our Nation's defense and the families of those
killed in its service.1,
2
VA Mission Statement: To fulfill President Lincoln's promise, "To care for him who
shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan."
Figure 1. President Abraham Lincoln and Union Soldiers during the Civil War (1862). (Alexander
Gardner/Library of Congress). McPherson, James M. Smithsonian Magazine (January 9, 2009).
VA carries out four specific missions to fulfill President Lincoln's promise:
Veterans Health Care: VA's Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is the largest
integrated health care network in the United States, with 1,294 health care facilities
serving over 9 million enrolled Veterans each year. VA provides Service members with a
seamless transition from their U.S. Department of Defense (DoD)-provided health care
into the VA system of care.
1 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). About VA. https://www.va.gov/about_val.
2 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). The Origin of the VA Motto: Lincoln's Second Inaugural Address.
Page 1 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Veterans Benefits: Veterans can receive a range of benefits and services that help them
transition back to civilian life. Through the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), VA
helps Service members transition out of military service and assists with education, home
loans, life insurance and much more.
National Cemeteries: The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) ensures those who
served this Nation are never forgotten. NCA provides dignified burial services for
Veterans and eligible family members by maintaining cemeteries as national shrines and
providing lasting tributes that commemorate their service and sacrifice to our Nation.
The Fourth Mission: VA's "Fourth Mission" is an operational capability that leverages
VA's personnel, equipment and infrastructure to support greater resource sharing across
Federal departments and agencies. By providing expanded Federal government
emergency response capacity, VA improves the Nation's preparedness and resilience to
a broad range of threats and hazards during war or national emergencies in accordance
with Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-8³ and the National Preparedness Goal.4 In support
of the Fourth Mission, VA maintains capabilities and develops plans for supporting
Federal response activities and processes.
Our Department remains fully committed to fulfilling the sacred obligation
that we have to those who serve in uniform.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough5
This document presents VA's Strategic Plan for fiscal years (FY) 2022-28 and describes
the important support VA's three Administrations (VHA, VBA and NCA) and Staff Offices
will provide to Veterans, Service members, families, caregivers and survivors as we strive
to achieve the very best outcomes for them. The strategic plan highlights the mission-
focused outcomes VA intends to accomplish to improve the quality of life, outcomes and
experiences for Veterans, Service members, their families, caregivers and survivors. The
Plan also describes the stewardship goal and objectives VA seeks to attain to improve
operations and management functions ensuring the most effective use of taxpayer
resources and sustainability for future generations of Veterans. Moreover, it reinforces a
commitment to a culture of interoperability that promotes a consistently positive and
seamless Veteran experience with VA. By aligning business, data, and information,
systems and technology VA ensures the right information and services securely and
reliably reach the right person, at the right time and in the best manner to make timely,
informed decisions and to enable actions.
VA'S FOUR FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
The VA Secretary's 4 fundamental principles and characteristics informed development of
VA's 4 strategic goals, 13 strategic objectives and 75 strategies described in this strategic
3 (The White House 2011). Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-8.
4 (Department of Homeland Security 2015). National Preparedness Goal.
5 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). I CARE (May 19, 2021).
Page 2 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
plan. Each implementing strategy aligns to one or more principles and connects to other
strategies to ensure a comprehensive approach to improving outcomes and experiences
throughout a Veteran's life journey, starting from the Veteran's or Service member's first
contact with VA, during military service and transition to civilian life and through end of
life. The Secretary's fundamental principles lead and manage VA in alignment with VA's
ICARE Core Values, Core Characteristics and Customer Experience Principles6, 7 to
ensure the delivery of quality and timely benefits, care and services to Veterans, their
families, caregivers, survivors and Service members.
Advocacy-Access-Outcomes-Excellence
1. Advocacy-VA will be the Nation's premier advocate for Veterans, their families,
caregivers and survivors.
2. Access-VA will provide timely access to VA resources: world-class health care,
earned benefits and a final resting place as a lasting tribute to their service.
Deliver benefits, care and services to our most vulnerable Veterans.
Reduce Veterans' homelessness and suicide.
Ensure access to educational opportunities, training and jobs worthy of the
Veteran's skills and service.
Provide care in their homes when Veterans need it and the training, support and
resources our caregivers need.
3. Outcomes-Veteran outcomes will drive everything we do.
Leverage data, informatics and evidence to understand outcomes.
Measure the quality and effectiveness of benefits, care and services and
Veterans' experiences and satisfaction.
4. Excellence-VA will seek excellence in all we do for Veterans.
Leverage the strength and diversity that defines our Veterans, our workforce and
our country.
Ensure every Veteran is afforded access to VA's capacity and resources.
Ensure diversity, equity and inclusiveness are fundamental to everything we do.
VA welcomes all Veterans, including women, Veterans of color and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and other identities (LGBTQ+).8
Ensure every person feels safe, free of harassment and discrimination in VA
facilities.
Beyond these four fundamental principles, VA also will:
Improve management and accountability.
Customize care to meet specific needs.
6 (McDonough, Denis 2021). "Restoring Faith and Rebuilding Trust" (March 25, 2021). The House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs.
7
(Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Vantage Point. A message from VA Secretary Denis McDonough
(February 9, 2021).
8 LGBTQ+; the "+" represents identities beyond the conventional ones.
Page 3 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Ensure racial justice and an equal chance for opportunity.
Reduce staff shortfalls, leadership gaps.
Continue to build Veteran trust in VA.
ABOUT VA
VA is committed to serving Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors throughout
their life journey. To do so, VA's 3 Administrations and 23 major Staff Offices deliver
benefits, care and services to improve well-being, outcomes and memorialization services
to honor Veterans' sacrifice and contributions to the Nation. Furthermore, VA partners
with families and caregivers to provide the best care and address the unique needs of our
Veterans.
About VA
Quantity
1. Full Time Employees (as of Quarter (Q)4/FY 2021)
398,444
2. Health Care Professionals Rotating Through VA (Academic Year
118,012
2019-20)
3. Total Unique Patients Treated (FY 2020)
6.45 Million (M)
4. VA Supervised Life Insurance Policies (as of Q3/FY 2021)
5.28 M
5. Active VA Guaranteed Home Loans (as of Q3/FY 2021)
3.55 M
6. Face Amount of Insurance Policies Supervised and Administered
$1.21 Trillion
by VA (as of Q3/FY 2021)
Data Source Rows 1-69
7.
Interments in VA National Cemeteries (FY 2020)
126,884
8. Headstones and Markers provided (FY 2020)
315,388
9. Presidential Memorial Certificates issued (FY 2020)
547,019
Data Source Rows 7-910
VA's Staff Offices provide a variety of services to the Department that enable
accomplishment of the mission including information technology, human resources
management, strategic planning, Veterans outreach and education, financial
management, acquisition and facilities management. 11 The Board of Veterans' Appeals
(Board) conducts hearings and renders appeals decisions for benefits and services on
behalf of the Secretary. VA also has offices and programs that focus on marginalized,
underserved and at-risk Veterans, such as the Center for Minority Veterans and Center
for Women Veterans and programs focused on mental health and suicide prevention,
eliminating homelessness and fostering Veteran success through Veteran Readiness and
Employment (VR&E) to ensure we accomplish our mission and deliver the benefits, care
and services Veterans earned and need.
9 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics (NCVAS). VA
Benefits & Health Care Utilization (July 15, 2021).
10 Office of Plans and Policy, NCA.
11 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). About VA. (May 2019).
Page 4 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
ORGANIZATION
VA's Central Office (VACO) is in Washington, DC, and field facilities are throughout the
Nation as well as in the U.S. territories and in the Philippines. Veteran programs are
delivered by VA's three major Administrations: VHA, VBA and NCA. The Administrations
and Staff Offices work together to consistently deliver high-quality benefits, care and
services that improve outcomes for Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and
Service members and accomplish our mission through routine day-to-day operations and
during national emergencies, such as natural disasters, pandemics, terrorism and war. 12
Figure 2. Convalescing soldiers performing needlework as occupational therapy at Walter Reed Army
Hospital, Washington, D.C. (c.1918).
VA remains committed to strengthening the health care system, expanding
access and pushing the boundaries of what is possible in serving our
Nation's Veterans.
-VA Secretary Denis McDonough.
12 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). About VA: Organization.
Page 5 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Veterans Health Care: VHA is the largest integrated health care network in the United
States with 1,294 health care facilities supporting over 9 million enrolled Veterans and
delivering health care to over 6 million Veterans each year. VA provides a broad range of
primary care, specialized care and related medical and social support services that are
uniquely related to Veterans' health or special needs.
VHA advances medical research and development in ways that support Veterans' needs
by pursuing medical research in areas that most directly address the diseases and
conditions that affect Veterans.
VA carries out four specific health-related missions: health care, education, research and
emergency response. Services and benefits are provided through a nationwide network of
VA Medical Centers, inpatient and outpatient sites of care and over 990 Community
Access Points. In addition, VA has 3 Veterans Crisis Line (VCL) call centers and the
Veterans Combat Call Center as well as access to Readjustment Counseling Services
provided through 318 Vet Centers which includes 83 Mobile Vet Centers, 55 mobile sites
(not mobile Vet Centers) and 4 unclassified stations.13
VHA Continuum of Care Classification
No. of Stations
VA Medical Center (VAMC)
171
Health Care Center (HCC)
12
Multi-Specialty Community-Based Outpatient Clinics (CBOC)
202
Primary Care CBOC
520
Other Outpatient Services
379
Residential Care Site
9
Extended Care Site
1
Total
1,2944
Veterans Benefits: Service members,
Veterans, their families, caregivers and
survivors can obtain a range of benefits
through VBA to improve their economic
security and quality of life. VA helps Service
members transition out of military service and
delivers a variety of benefits to Veterans and
their families that include compensation,
pension, fiduciary services, educational
opportunities, VR&E services, the VA Home
Loan Guaranty benefit and life insurance.
13 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). VAST Counts and Changes Report.
Page 6 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Services are provided from 56 Regional Offices and the National Capital Region Benefits
Office (NCRBO), 142 additional out-based offices at which VR&E operates and 133
Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES) offices at military installations located
within and outside the continental United States (VR&E operates at 71). VA offers support
through the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) at 300 military installations and 93
VetSuccess on Campus (VSOC) sites are operated by VR&E at colleges and
universities; 14,15 in addition to support services provided from 2 Education Regional
Processing Offices, 6 Fiduciary Hubs, 3 Pension Management Centers, 1 Insurance
Center and 8 Regional Loan Centers.
National Cemeteries: NCA ensures those who served this Nation are never forgotten.
NCA provides dignified burial services for Veterans and eligible family members and
maintains cemeteries as national shrines to provide lasting tributes that commemorate
their service and sacrifice to our Nation. 16 NCA provides eligible Veterans with burial
options at national cemeteries and grant-funded state Veterans' cemeteries; headstones
and markers; Presidential Memorial Certificates; and medallions. Memorial benefits and
services are provided at 155 National Cemeteries and 119 Veterans Cemetery Grants
Program funded state, Tribal and territorial cemeteries.17
CORE VALUES, CORE CHARACTERISTICS AND CUSTOMER
EXPERIENCE PRINCIPLES
VA's five, "I CARE" core values underscore the obligations inherent in VA's mission and
define who we are, our culture and how we care for Veterans and eligible beneficiaries.
Our values are more than just words-they affect outcomes in our daily interactions with
Veterans, eligible beneficiaries and our VA colleagues and partners.
18
14 Veterans Benefits Administration. Veterans Benefits Administration Progress & Results Webcast: For
End of Fiscal Year 2018 (October 16, 2018), p. 7.
15 Veterans Benefits Administration (2018). VBA Education Service Quarterly Webinar, p. 8.
16 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). National Cemetery Administration (May 21, 2021).
17 Office of Policy and Planning, NCA, June 2, 2021.
18 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). I CARE Core Values. (September 8, 2021).
Page 7 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
My promise to Veterans remains the same: to promote, preserve and restore
Veterans' health and well-being; to empower and equip them to achieve
their life goals; and to provide state-of-the-art treatments.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough19
Core Values
Integrity, Commitment, Advocacy, Respect and Excellence
Taking the first letter of each word-Integrity, Commitment, Advocacy, Respect,
Excellence-creates a powerful acronym "I CARE" that reminds each VA employee of the
importance of their role in this Department. These core values come together as five
promises we make as individuals and as an organization to those we serve.
Integrity: Act with high moral principle. Adhere to the highest professional standards.
Maintain the trust and confidence of all with whom I engage.
Commitment: Work diligently to serve Veterans and other beneficiaries. Be driven by an
earnest belief in VA's mission. Fulfill my individual responsibilities and organizational
responsibilities.
Advocacy: Be truly Veteran-centric by identifying, fully considering and appropriately
advancing the interests of Veterans and other beneficiaries.
Respect: Treat all those I work with and serve with dignity and respect.
Excellence: Strive for the highest quality and continuous improvement. Be thoughtful and
decisive in leadership and accountable for my actions, willing to admit mistakes and
rigorous in correcting them.
Please visit VA's I CARE website for more information.20
Core Characteristics
VA's Core Characteristics define what we stand for and what VA strives to be as an
organization. They embody the qualities of VA employees to support VA's mission and
commitment to Veterans, their families and beneficiaries. The Core Characteristics are:
Trustworthy, Accessible, Quality, Innovative, Agile and Integrated. 21,22
Trustworthy: VA earns the trust of those it serves-every day-through the actions of all
employees.
19 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Statement of the Honorable Denis McDonough Restoring
Faith by Building Trust-VA's First 100 Days.
20 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.), I CARE.
21 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). I CARE Core Values and Characteristics.
22
VA Directive 0010, VA Customer Experience.
Page 8 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Accessible: VA engages and welcomes Veterans and other beneficiaries, facilitating
their use of the entire array of its services. Each interaction will be positive and
productive.
Quality: VA provides the highest standard of care and services to Veterans and
beneficiaries while managing the cost of its programs and being efficient stewards of all
resources entrusted to it by the American people.
Innovative: VA prizes curiosity and initiative, encourages creative contributions from all
employees, seeks continuous improvement and adapts to remain at the forefront in
knowledge, proficiency and capability to deliver the highest standard of care and services.
Agile: VA anticipates and adapts quickly to current challenges and new requirements by
continuously assessing the environment in which it operates and devising solutions to
better serve Veterans, other beneficiaries and Service members.
Integrated: VA links care and services across the Department; other Federal, state and
local agencies; partners; and Veterans Services Organizations to provide useful and
understandable programs to Veterans and other beneficiaries. VA's relationship with DoD
is unique and VA will nurture it for the benefit of Veterans and Service members.
Customer Experience Principles
VA will provide the best customer experience in its delivery of care, benefits and memorial
services to Veterans, Service members, their families, caregivers and survivors. All VA
employees are guided by VA's Core Values and Characteristics and Customer
Experience Principles to deliver exceptional customer experiences. Customer experience
is the product of interactions between an organization and a customer over the duration of
their relationship. VA measures these interactions through Ease, Effectiveness and
Emotion, all of which impact the overall trust the customer has in the organization.
Ease: VA will make access to care, benefits and memorial services smooth and easy.
Effectiveness: VA will deliver benefits, care, memorialization and services to the
customer's satisfaction.
Emotion: VA will deliver benefits, care, memorialization and services in a manner that
makes customers feel honored and valued in their interactions with VA.
VA will use customer experience data and insights in strategy development and decision-
making to ensure that the voice of Veterans, Service members, their families, caregivers
and survivors inform how VA delivers benefits, care, memorialization and services.
ABOUT OUR VETERANS
Veterans are individuals who have served in one of the eight uniformed services and
meet the length of service and character of discharge requirements prescribed by law:
Army; Marine Corps; Navy; Air Force; Space Force; Coast Guard; some members of the
Public Health Services and the Commissioned Officer Corps of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); as well as eligible members of the Reserve and
National Guard components; World War Il Merchant Mariners; certain members of the
Page 9 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Philippine Armed Forces; and other groups designated by DoD. When the term "Veteran"
is used in this VA Strategic Plan, it includes all who are eligible for VA benefits, care,
memorialization and services.
VA also provides benefits and services to
eligible survivors, spouses, dependents
and dependent parents of Veterans, as
well as caregivers of certain disabled
Veterans. Service members in an active-
duty status also may be eligible for certain
VA benefits and services which include,
but are not limited to, Service members'
Group Life Insurance, Traumatic Injury
Protection, GI Bill, Education and Career
Counseling, the VA Home Loan program
and certain medical services. The
Journeys of Veterans Map highlights
different life stages Veterans may
experience and particular moments that
matter most to them during their
journey.23The following table shows the
number of living Veterans and their use of
certain VA benefits, care and services.
VA Benefits and Health Care Utilization
Quantity
1. Estimated population of living Veterans (as of Q4 FY 2020)24
19.5 Million (M)
2. Estimated population of spouses and dependent children of living
23.1 M
Veterans (as of September 30, 2019)
3. Total estimated recipients or potential recipients of Federal
13% or
Veterans' benefits based on resident population of the United States,
43.2 M
Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas and U.S. citizens living abroad (13% of
the U.S. population of 333.4 M)
Data Source Rows 1-325
23 See Appendix H of Journey of Veterans Map.
24 Living Veterans in the United States, American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico
and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
25
(Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). VA FY 2022 Budget Submission. Supplemental Information &
Appendices, Volume 1 of 4. p. 17.
Page 10 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA Benefits and Health Care Utilization
Quantity
4. Projected number of living Veterans in 2028
16 M
5. Estimated number of female Veterans
2.03 M
6. Percentage of Veterans age 65 or older (as of Q2 FY 2021)
46.1%
7. Total enrollees in VA health care system (FY 2020)
9.16 M
8. VA Education Beneficiaries (FY 2020)
875,060
9. Veteran Amputees Utilizing VA Health Care (FY 2020)
96,681
10. Veterans Receiving VA Disability Compensation (as of Q2 FY
5.14 M
2021)
11. Veterans Rated 100% Disabled (as of Q2 FY 2021)
909,033
12. Veterans Receiving VA Pension (as of Q2 FY 2021)
203,330
13. Veterans in Receipt of Individual Unemployability Benefits
373,843
(as of Q2 FY 2021)
14. .Surviving Spouses Receiving Dependency Indemnity
433,756
Compensation (as of Q2 FY 2021)
15. Veterans Compensated for PTSD (as of Q2 FY 2021)
1,215,905
16. Veterans Participating in Veterans Readiness & Employment
123,490
(Chapter 31) Benefits (FY 2020)
Data Sources Rows 4-1626
17. Survivors of deceased Veterans receiving survivor benefits (either
605,000
dependency and Indemnity Compensation or death pension
payments)
18. Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC)27
446,000
19. Home Loan guaranty
18,300
20. Survivors' Pension28
159,000
21. Education utilization for Veterans' survivors/dependents2
279,857
Data Sources Rows 17-21 30
VAI FY 2022-28 STRATEGIC PLAN
VA is committed to improving outcomes, access and the quality of life for Veterans, their
families, caregivers and survivors. We advocate for Veterans and seize opportunities that
address the challenges impacting their lives today while preparing for emerging threats
26 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). VA Benefits & Health Care Utilization (April 21, 2021).
27 Survivors of Veterans who died from service-related conditions; 96% are surviving spouses, 3% are
surviving children, 1% are surviving parents.
28 Pension for low-income Survivors of Veterans with war-time Service. WWII 112,108, Korean War 50,550;
Vietnam War 29,500; Gulf War 2,728; Other 864: period of service includes survivors of those from the War
with Spain (Apr. 1898 to Aug. 1898); Mexican Border Period (May 1916 to Apr 1917); and WWI (Apr. 1917
to Nov. 1918).
29 Scholarships to Survivors of Veterans who died in service after September 11, 2001.
30 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2020). On Memorial Day VA Honors All of the Survivors of Those Who
Have Served and Died.
Page 11 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
and the rapid pace of change. The VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan describes our approach
to ensure Veterans receive timely benefits, care, memorialization and services and
ensures we deliver quality experiences and customer satisfaction that surpass
expectations today and into the future.
The strategic plan has 4 strategic goals, 13 objectives and 75 strategies that are
specifically designed to drive achievement of VA's mission and the Secretary's
fundamental principles. The strategic plan reinforces VA's communications from the
Administrations and Staff Offices to deliver clear and consistent messages. This message
demonstrates our appreciation for each Veteran's sacrifice and service and our
commitment to improving their health, well-being and economic security. Goals,
objectives and strategies guide the Department and ensure a unified effort towards
achieving VA's mission.
The strategic plan also includes performance milestones for each strategic objective.
These performance milestones describe the desired state of affairs at the end of this
strategic plan and help us understand our progress and when the necessary work is
completed. Performance milestones demonstrate through evidence that we have
achieved the strategic objective or that more work is still needed.
stakeholder
While developing this strategic plan, VA conducted more than 50
interviews with senior leaders across VA, with other Federal agencies,
Veteran Service Organizations (VSOs) and Congress that have equities
with VA and Veterans.
Examples of the stakeholders interviewed include U.S. Social Security Administration,
U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD)/Ginnie Mae, HUD/Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing (VASH), U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), National
Institute of Health (NIH) and National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), U.S. Small
Business Administration (SBA), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), U.S. Department
of Labor (DOL), U.S. Department of Education (DOE) and DoD. VA also interviewed
Congressional members and nine VSOs. Areas where inputs from these "Stakeholder
consultations" changed direction of the plan are highlighted with the icon.
VA Learning Agenda and Capacity Assessment
The Foundations for Evidence-based Policymaking (EBP) Act of 2018³¹ (P.L. 115-435,
the "Evidence Act") requires VA to create an "evidence-building plan" (i.e., Learning
Agenda and Capacity Assessment) and incorporate them in the strategic plan. VA's
Learning Agenda identifies strategic and operational policy questions that VA must
address and informs the strategic plan (OMB A-11, page 4 of Section 290). 32 VA's
Capacity Assessment describes the "coverage, quality, methods, effectiveness and
independence of the statistics, evaluation, research and analysis efforts" (OMB A-11,
pages 6-7 of Section 290) and it also informs the strategic plan.
31 (115th Congress 2021). Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.
32 OMB Circular No. A-11 (April 2021). Preparation, Submission and Execution of the Budget.
Page 12 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
This document presents the alignment of the VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan to VA's FY
2022-28 Learning Agenda and FY 2022-28 Capacity Assessment. Priority questions in
the Learning Agenda are aligned to specific strategies in Objectives 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
and 4.4 to ensure VA will improve outcomes for underserved, marginalized and at-risk
Veterans. The Capacity Assessment describes VA's ability to perform evaluation and
evidence building activities and identifies gaps that VA must address. Six Strategic
Objectives (2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 4.4) align to the Capacity Assessment. VA
developed three strategies for Objective 4.4, (4.4.7, 4.4.9 and 4.4.10) to address
capability gaps and improve our performance and the effectiveness of our evaluation and
analytical efforts.
Page 13 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIC GOAL 1: VA consistently communicates with its
customers and partners to assess and maximize performance,
evaluate needs and build long-term relationships and trust.
GOAL DESCRIPTION
Goal 1 ensures communications are clear and messages are consistent across VA and
the ecosystem of Veteran-supporting partners. VA delivers information to Veterans the
way the Veteran wants to receive it, so Veterans understand their eligibility for benefits,
care, memorialization and services and how to access the benefits they earned. This goal
ensures VA knows Veterans, understands their needs and how the benefits, care and
services we deliver impacts their lives. Goal 1 enables VA to connect with Service
members early in their military careers to establish long-term relationships with them. VA
will maintain that relationship as the Service member transitions to Veteran status and
support their families, caregivers and survivors as they transition through each phase of
their life journey.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.1: (Consistent and Easy to Understand
Information) VA and partners use multiple channels and methods to ensure
information about benefits, care and services is clear and easy to
understand and access.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 1.1 describes VA's approach to delivering information and communicating with
Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors, Service members, employees and other
stakeholders to ensure the information they need is readily available, accessible to all and
easy to understand. VA uses customer feedback and individual/aggregated data to
understand population groups and proactively distribute tailored information that meets
the needs of recipients to ensure equitable access so that all Veterans feel welcomed and
valued.
1.1 Co-Leads
1.1 Performance Milestones
Veterans Experience Office (VEO)
Desired outcomes for communications.
Office of Public and
Veterans are more informed and understand
Intergovernmental Affairs (OPIA),
their eligibility for benefits, care,
National Veterans Outreach Office
memorialization and services.
Page 14 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
In order to fulfill our country's most sacred obligation, every decision I
make will be guided by whether it increases Veterans' access to care and
benefits and improves outcomes for them.
VA Secretary Denis McDonough. 33,
34
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 1.1.1: (VA Welcomes all Veterans) VA proactively distributes
information and resources at every phase of the Veteran life journey, or as needed when
circumstances change, to inform and welcome all Veterans and ensure resources are
easily accessible.
Implementing Strategy 1.1.1: (VA
VA Principles
Welcomes all Veterans) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
VA Welcomes ALL Veterans
Fundamental Principles.
Excellence
VA communicates via social media networks, mail, email, telephone, text, outreach events
and online platforms and delivers step-by-step guidance, checklists and updates on new
programs, processes and policy revisions that address all Veteran issues, including the
civilian-military divide and stigma associated with mental health conditions.
Consistent communications and information sharing begin at military service and continue
throughout the Veteran's life. Service members, Veterans, eligible family members,
caregivers and survivors receive guidance during the military-to-civilian transition, pre-
separation, post-separation, receipt of initial or revised service connection rating,
decisions from the Board, change in priority group designation, when they reach a certain
age or as circumstances change to ensure information and resources are readily
available to make informed decisions.
Implementing Strategy 1.1.2: (Equitable Access) VA and the ecosystem of
partnerships communicate in a variety of languages and in various ways to ensure
equitable access to information and resources and support those with physical and/or
intellectual disabilities.
Implementing Strategy 1.1.2: (Equitable
VA Principles
Access) ensures achievement of two VA
Veteran Experience
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
VA collaborates with partners to understand and share communication preferences of
Service members, Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors and tailors outreach
33 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Statement of the Honorable Denis McDonough Restoring
Faith by Building Trust - VA's First 100 Days.
34 The Biden Plan to Keep Our Sacred Obligation to Our Veterans.
Page 15 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
to meet their needs and preferences. VA customizes all forms of communications for
groups and individuals whose primary language is not English and individuals with
hearing, vision and/or speech impairments. Multi-channel two-way communications allow
recipients to easily provide feedback with recommendations that enhances VA's
understanding of needs and experiences, ensures equitable access and improves the
quality of benefits, care and services provided especially to at-risk, underserved³5 and
marginalized36 Veterans.37
VA offers multilingual customer experiences
to meet the needs of a diverse Veteran
population and provides a variety of options
to receive information that ensures families,
caregivers and survivors get the information
they need in a manner that is easy to
understand. Communications, such as
emails, text messages and direct/postal
mail, are written in a variety of languages
with customers in mind and delivered to
meet the needs and preferences of the
recipient. Enhanced partnerships expand
VA's ability to ensure messages and
information about benefits are easy to
understand and that customers can reliably
access resources and easily connect with
VA representatives and partners for further
guidance and support.
VA and ecosystem partners that support Veterans ensure websites, web-based
applications, attached files and other published documents are written in plain language
and follow the Plain Writing Act of 2010³8 to improve transparency and accessibility. VA
and partners will use human-centered design (HCD) as a best practice and ensure
accessibility to individuals with disabilities as Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act
requires. 39, 40 Furthermore, VA educates employees on communication approaches to
35 "The term "underserved communities' refers to populations sharing a particular characteristic, as well as
geographic communities, that have been systematically denied a full opportunity to participate in aspects of
economic, social and civic life, as exemplified by the list in the preceding definition of "equity.' (Executive
Order 13985 Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal
Government 2021) (January 25, 2021).
36 (Merriam-Webster Dictionary n.d.). Marginalize means to "relegate to an unimportant or powerless
position within a society or group.'
37 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021). 2021-27380.pdf (federalregister.gov).
38 (111th Congress 2010). Public Law 111-274, Plain Writing Act of 2010.
39
(Federal Communications Commission n.d.). Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act 29 U.S.C. § 794d.
40 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021). 2021-27380.pdf (federalregister.gov).
Page 16 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
deliver accurate and consistent information, benefits, care and services to Veterans,
Service members and their support networks of families, caregivers and survivors.
Implementing Strategy 1.1.3: (Veteran Insights) VA uses proactive and consistent
communications enable customer feedback and recommendations to enhance
understanding of Veterans to improve access, experiences and quality of services.
Implementing Strategy 1.1.3: (Veteran
VA Principles
Insights) ensures achievement of two VA
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Experience
Veteran Outcomes
VA incorporates customer feedback to improve VA processes and operations. VA
leverages customer interactions and enterprise data to ensure common information is
current and readily available for employees during any interaction with Service members,
Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors. Customer communications and Veteran
data enable the efficient and effective delivery of benefits, care, memorialization and
services and improve analysis, outreach campaigns and initiatives.41
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.2: (Lifelong Relationships and Trust) VA
listens to Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors, Service members,
employees and other stakeholders to project future trends, anticipate needs
and deliver effective and agile solutions that improve their outcomes, access
and experiences.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 1.2 ensures VA consults stakeholders and uses HCD practices to understand
needs, preferences, customer experiences and satisfaction and how benefits, care and
services impact the lives of Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service
members. VA expands stakeholder consultations to include cohorts outside the traditional
Veteran population, such as employees, clinicians receiving training at VA facilities,
financial and educational institutions that deliver various benefits and State, Tribal,
territorial and private facilities that partner with NCA to provide memorialization services.
VA will make it is easy for stakeholders to provide feedback and leverage their responses
to drive change across the ecosystem of partners that improves performance, access, the
quality of experiences and customer satisfaction.
41 (116th Congress (2019-2020) 2020). Public Law 116-213, Department of Veterans Affairs
Website Accessibility Act of 2019.
Page 17 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND LEARNING AGENDA ALIGNMENT
Implementing Strategy 1.2.1: (Improved Understanding) aligns with VBA Learning
Agenda Question 3a: Understanding Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Survivor Experience:
How can VBA, working together with VHA and other stakeholders, better understand
when MST survivors are not optimally served and/or negatively impacted when interacting
with VBA. Implementing Strategy 1.2.1: (Improved Understanding) ensures VA uses
HCD, journey maps and data to understand and improve experiences and satisfaction for
all Veterans.
1.2 Co-Leads
1.2 Performance Milestone
VEO
VA customer experience characteristics.
NCA, Office of
Ease: Veterans have easy access to services they need.
Finance and
Effectiveness: Veterans get the services they need.
Planning (OFO)
Emotion: Veterans feel respected and valued.
VBA, Office of Policy
Trust: Veterans trust VA to fulfill our country's commitment
and Oversight
to Veterans.
(OPO)
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 1.2.1: (Improved Understanding) VA understands customers
and all Veteran cohorts to improve experiences and trust.
Implementing Strategy 1.2.1: (Improved
VA Principles
Understanding) ensures achievement of
Data, Informatics, Evidence
two VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
VA integrates HCD, customer experience data and the Journeys of Veterans Map42 in
Departmental policies, plans and processes to develop a comprehensive understanding
of all customer cohorts and sub-populations, which include women, minorities, American
Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) Veterans, families, caregivers, those with physical and/or
intellectual disabilities, older Veterans, MST survivors, LGBTQ+ persons, VA employees
and other stakeholders.43 HCD and journey maps allow VA to understand customer pain
points and bright spots to improve VA's service design and delivery based on what
matters most to Veterans and reduce burdens accessing available resources.44
VEO and Human Resources and Administration/Operations, Security and Preparedness
(HR&A/OSP) have partnered to lead VA's effort to establish a world-class employee
experience (EX). Ultimately, VA efforts to improve EX will directly impact the customer
experience (CX) for Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors, consistent with VA's
42 Journeys of Veterans Map is also accessible in Appendix H.
43 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). VA's Customer Experience Institute (VACXi).
44 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021). 2021-27380.pdf (federalregister.gov).
Page 18 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
I CARE Core Values, Core Characteristics and Customer Experience Principles. VEO and
HR&A/OSP are leading the effort to create the Federal government's first-ever EX
Journey Map. Modeled after the Journey of Veterans Map, the Journeys of VA Employees
Map45 captured over 11,000 insights from a diverse set of VA employees (Wage Grade-
Senior Executive Service, clinical, frontline, clerical, etc.) in 33 geographic areas. This
effort identified 5 "phases" and 30 Moments that Matter (bright spots and pain points) a
VA team member may encounter, from interest in employment with VA through retirement.
The purpose of this effort is to catalyze action through analysis of insights and align what
we do with the needs and expectations of those who work with us.46
VA will also leverage population-level statistics and analytics to review and analyze data
to project trends, anticipate demand and understand the impact to the organization. This
understanding allows VA to provide guidance to employees and customers to ensure the
consistent delivery of information related to benefits, care and services. The resulting data
and information enable VA to use evidence to understand experiences and anticipate
needs and proactively share information that ensures Service members, Veterans, their
family members, caregivers and survivors understand options.
Learning Agenda
Understanding Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Survivor Experience: 3a. How can VBA,
working together with VHA and other stakeholders, better understand when MST
survivors are not optimally served and/or negatively impacted when interacting with VBA?
VBA, VHA, VEO and partners will collect the demographic data needed and use HCD,
Journey Mapping, Customer Persona Development and statistical analyses to define
MST Journey Map to gain a better understanding of the MST survivor population and
improve their outcomes and experiences.
Implementing Strategy 1.2.2: (Interactive and Customer-centric) VA's automated,
easy to use, flexible and interactive customer-centric feedback system and process
connects the Department to all cohorts of customers to understand needs and the impact
of benefits, care, memorialization and services on their economic security, health, quality
of life outcomes and dignity of end of life.
Implementing Strategy 1.2.2: (Interactive
VA Principles
and Customer-centric) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
Veteran Outcomes
Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Effectiveness
VA engages employees, Service members, Veterans, their families, caregivers and
survivors, other customers, government partners, VSOs, small businesses and other non-
governmental partners to understand the impact of benefits, care and services on
customers and identify gaps that must be addressed. Consistent and proactive customer
45 Journeys of VA Employees Map.
46 46 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021). 2021-27380.pdf (federalregister.gov)
Page 19 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
engagement during policy development will improve VA's understanding of how policies,
processes and practices impact customers and enable VA to revise them as needed prior
to and following implementation.
Implementing Strategy 1.2.3: (Quality and Performance) VA and partners use
customer feedback and insights to understand the quality of experiences and services
provided and evaluate performance against benchmarks to determine training needs to
improve communications and performance.
Implementing Strategy 1.2.3: (Quality
VA Principles
and Performance) ensures achievement
Quality and Effectiveness
of three VA Secretary Fundamental
Veteran Outcomes
Principles.
Veteran Satisfaction
VA collaborates with partners that deliver benefits, care and services to Veterans and
develops exceptional training programs to leverage technology and strong practices to
improve customer service, experiences and satisfaction. These programs ensure
employees and partners understand communication and performance requirements to
improve Veteran outcomes and comply with VA standards.
Page 20 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIC GOAL 2: VA delivers timely, accessible, high-
quality benefits, care and services to meet the unique needs of
Veterans and all eligible beneficiaries.
GOAL DESCRIPTION
Goal 2 ensures access to resources and tailoring the delivery of benefits and customizing
care, memorialization and services to foster equity and promote independence and
optimal outcomes and well-being for Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and
Service members. This is the largest goal in the VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan with 5
objectives and 32 strategies that describe our approach or what VA will do to achieve the
objective. VA and the ecosystem of partners must work together to understand the needs
of Veteran groups and deliver benefits, care and services that address the unique needs
of individual Veterans. A thorough examination of Veteran cohorts helps VA identify
potential trends, innovations and emerging treatments that might impact Veterans at
different phases of their life journey. Trend analysis improves our understanding of
underserved, marginalized and at-risk Veterans to promote equity and access to
resources. VA is committed to delivering value to all Veterans and improving their
economic security, health and quality of life.
This strategic plan and VA's FY 2022-28 Learning Agenda are aligned and focused on
improving outcomes and quality of life for underserved, marginalized and at-risk
Veterans. Learning Agenda priority questions enhance our understanding of challenges
to improve care and services for our most vulnerable Veterans. Each Learning Agenda
Page 21 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
question is aligned directly to an implementing strategy and priority questions span four
of the five Goal 2 Objectives (except Objective 2.5). Learning Agenda questions and
strategies are complementary; the Learning Agenda improves VA's understanding of the
specific challenges that vulnerable Veterans might face and supports strategies to
achieve the desired outcome described in the strategic objective. Detailed information on
Learning Agenda priority questions is provided in the relevant strategic objectives.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.1: (Underserved, Marginalized and At-Risk
Veterans) VA emphasizes the delivery of benefits, care and services to
underserved, marginalized and at-risk Veterans to prevent suicide and
homelessness, improve their economic security, health, resiliency and
quality of life and achieve equity. 47,48
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
VA is focused on addressing needs and improving economic security, quality of life and
independence for Veterans who need us most-our at-risk, marginalized and
underserved Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service members.
Objective 2.1 ensures VA programs, initiatives and the ecosystem of partners support the
whole person and address mental health and suicide, homelessness and other
challenges impacting Veterans' well-being. This objective ensures reliable access to
benefits, care and services and promotes improved outcomes for Veterans living in rural
areas, women, minorities, American Indian and Alaska Native, severely wounded, ill and
injured, those with physical and/or intellectual disabilities, LGBTQ+ Veterans, transitioning
Service members and those at-risk for food insecurity. HCD best practices will enable VA
to deeply understand the needs and experiences of these populations.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND LEARNING AGENDA ALIGNMENT
Three strategies in Objective 2.1 align to two VHA and two VBA Learning Agenda priority
questions to understand specific challenges related to mental health and suicide risk, the
military-to-civilian transition and employment and access to care for underserved
Veterans. Research to address Learning Agenda questions and the implementation of
each implementing strategy will enable VA to drive change to achieve the objective and
47 (Executive Order 13985 Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government 2021). "The term 'equity' means the consistent and systematic fair, just and impartial
treatment of all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved communities that have been
denied such treatment, such as Black, Latino and Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian
Americans and Pacific Islanders and other persons of color; members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities; persons who live in rural
areas; and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality." (January 25, 2021).
48 The Biden Plan to Keep Our Sacred Obligation to Our Veterans.
Page 22 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
improve outcomes for Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service
members.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.1: (Mental Health and Suicide Prevention) aligns with VHA
LA Question 3 Suicide Prevention: What strategies work best to prevent suicide among
Veterans? Implementing Strategy 2.1.1 includes three strategies specifically designed to
reduce Veteran suicide. Universal strategies to reach all Veterans. Selective strategies
to target Veterans who may be at increased risk for suicide. Indicated strategies to
connect with a smaller segment of Veterans at elevated risk of suicide or mental illness.
VHA Learning Agenda strategies include Caring Contacts/Caring Letters, which provide
messages to individuals at risk of suicidal behavior. Caring Contacts/Caring Letters aim to
evaluate the effects of messages sent to VCL callers to increase VA's knowledge of care
utilization, mental health outcomes and suicidality and identify facilitators and barriers to
program implementation.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.1 also aligns to VBA's LA question for Disability Benefits
Questionnaires (DBQs) 1c Can Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs) be updated to
improve data capture capabilities for tracking at-risk Veterans with a reported level of risk
for suicide? VA will expand Veteran demographic data on benefits recipients for use in
many types of studies to understand the technical capability and whether VA can use the
tool to improve understanding of Veterans at-risk for suicide. Additional data categories
could include race/ethnicity, familial status, housing status, sexual orientation and gender
identity.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.7: (Military-to-Civilian Transition) aligns to VBA's Learning
Agenda question for Evaluation of Transition Assistance Program 2a: To what extent is
VA's Transition Assistance Program (TAP) supporting the transition needs of newly
separated Veterans? This implementing strategy ensures VA and partners provide holistic
assessments and transition support to understand "economic well-being" starting 1 year
before transition and continuing at specific intervals for 1 year post transition. The
Learning Agenda examines the transition process and the impact of multiple changes to
the Service member or Veteran's life. The Learning Agenda and Implementing Strategy
2.1.7 ensure Service members experience a seamless transition from military service to
civilian life and promote economic security for Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.8: (Rural Veterans) aligns with VHA's Learning Agenda
Question 1 Access to Care: What are the ways VA can ensure that Veterans have access
to timely care in their preferred setting? VHA implemented two strategies to increase
access and deliver quality care to Veterans. The Medical Scribes Pilot Program aims to
provide assistants to aid medical providers and increase their productivity. The second
strategy implements a study to understand primary and mental health care shortage
areas and develop action plans to address shortages. Implementing Strategy 2.1.8
ensures that VA expands partnerships, addresses workforce disparities and invests in
new models of care for Veterans in underserved areas to ensure access to quality care.
Page 23 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT ALIGNMENT
Five strategies in objective 2.1 align specifically to VA evaluation activities or studies
described in Addendum D of the Capacity Assessment:
Implementing Strategy 2.1.1: (Mental Health and Suicide Prevention) aligns to one
evaluation activity or study:
Evaluating the Use of Peer Specialists to Deliver Cognitive Behavioral Social Skills
Training.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.3: (Homelessness) aligns to two VA evaluation activities or
studies:
Capturing the Dynamics of Homelessness through Ethnography and Mobile
Technology.
Assessing an Initiative to Facilitate Long-Term Financial and Housing Stability in
Vulnerable Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.4: (Minority Veterans) aligns to one evaluation activity or
study:
Social and Behavioral Determinants of Health in High-Risk Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.5: (Special Emphasis Groups) aligns to two VA evaluation
activities or studies:
Clinical care needs and experiences for patients with spinal cord injury identifying
as LGBT.
Addressing Intimate Partner Violence Among Women Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.6: (Women Veterans) aligns to one evaluation activity or
study:
MyPath. A Patient-Centered Web-Based Intervention to Improve Reproductive
Planning for Women Veterans.
2.1 Co-Leads
2.1 Performance Milestones
VHA, Office
Desired outcomes for underserved, marginalized and at-risk Veterans.
of Mental
Eliminate Veteran homelessness.
Health and
Improve Veteran mental health and reduce Veteran suicide.
Suicide
Improve Veteran economic security and reduce poverty.
Prevention
Improve equity and access to benefits, care, memorialization and
VBA, OFO
services for marginalized, underserved and at-risk Veterans.
Improve access to Mental Health and Specialty Care.
Increase specialty care appointments completed within 30 days.
Page 24 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
THE PRICE OF FREEDOM CAN BE SEEN WITHIN THESE WALLS
Figure 3. The New Orleans, Louisiana VA Medical Center.
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 2.1.1: (Mental Health and Suicide Prevention) VA engages
Veterans and Service members and delivers services and practices that promote lifelong
well-being and resilience to improve mental health, reduce Veteran suicide and empower
and equip them to achieve their life goals.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Consultations
Assessment
Suicide Prevention
Implementing
Caregivers
Strategy 2.1.1: (Mental Health and Suicide
Prevention) ensures achievement of three
Access to Resources
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
VA's Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention (OMHSP) deploys a robust, public
health approach to provide mental health care and suicide prevention services to all
Service members and Veterans who need it, in the right time and right place and deploys
technology to reach Veterans in remote and isolated communities. Such efforts are
designed to reduce Veteran suicide through partnerships with the community to
implement tailored, local prevention plans and evidence-based clinical strategies for
intervention informed by the VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline on the Assessment and
Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide. 49 Our comprehensive public health approach
operationalizes the 2018 National Strategy for Preventing Veteran Suicide50 through a
long term strategy, Suicide Prevention 2.0 initiative (SP 2.0) and a short-term strategy,
Suicide Prevention Now initiative (Now). SP 2.0 focuses on clinically based and
community-based prevention, intervention and postvention strategies over a 6-year period
49 (Department of Veterans Affairs; U.S. Department of Defense 2019). VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline:
Assessment and Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide.
50 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2018). National Strategy for Preventing Veteran Suicide 2018-2028.
Page 25 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
while the Now initiative rapidly identifies and addresses key priority areas focused on
advancing and enhancing Veteran suicide prevention efforts more immediately.
VA proactively engages family members
and caregivers about available resources
and how to support Veterans in engaging
in care. VA adopted an approach that
combines universal, targeted and selective
strategies to engage Veterans and their
families. Universal Strategies to reach all
A WAY
Veterans include communication
campaigns that shifted from driving
awareness-focused site visits to reaching
people where they are by completing a
viewing of our in-platform awareness
message video. Selective Strategies
target Veterans who may be at increased
suicide risk or at increased risk of burden
related to mental illness due to various
stressors. Indicated Strategies target a
smaller segment of Veterans at elevated
risk of suicide or escalation in mental
illness.
Inextricably linked to caring for and supporting Veterans and their families is
legal access
That's why VA's legal clinics and Medical Legal Partnerships
are fundamental to caring for Veterans and their families.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough.51
VA and trusted partners implement comprehensive, nationwide efforts to increase mental
health literacy and connection to care to decrease any stigma associated with seeking
help as part of our mission to promote, protect and restore Veterans' health and well-
being. VA proactively informs family members about available resources and how to
support Veterans in engaging in care and uses Mental Health Peer Support Specialists to
foster a sense of belonging, empower individuals to seek help, enhance resiliency and
ease transition from military service.
The Office of General Counsel (OGC) partners with VHA to expand the medical-legal
partnerships (MLP) located within VA across the country. VA's MLPs provide legal
services to Veterans and their families in housing, employment and education, access to
benefits, income and family law issues. Access to MLPs have shown that Veterans who
received legal services at an MLP experienced significant mental health improvement, as
well as improvements in their housing and income. The MLP program combines the
expertise of VA staff and health care clinicians who understand the health issues that are
51 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Remarks by Secretary Denis R. McDonough.
Page 26 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
unique to, or common for, Veterans, with the knowledge of lawyers who understand the
complexities of laws and policies that affect Veterans.
Learning Agenda
Suicide Prevention: VHA Question 3: What strategies work best to prevent suicide among
Veterans?
VA performs proactive outreach and implements communication strategies to address
suicide prevention through Caring Contacts/Caring Letters:
Caring Contacts/Caring Letters are brief, personal, non-demanding follow-up messages
sent to Veteran patients after they receive care to decrease suicide attempts. VA sends
follow-up communications (letter and digital) to Veterans who don't need to receive care
at a VA facility or who call the VCL and choose to identify themselves to the call
responder. VA is evaluating the approach in other Veteran populations, including those
seen in VA emergency departments.
Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs): VBA question 1c: Can Disability Benefits
Questionnaires (DBQs) be updated to improve data capture capabilities for tracking at-
risk Veterans with a reported level of risk for suicide?
VBA will leverage DBQs to incorporate additional data sources and demographic
categories as needed and track at-risk Veterans with a reported level of high acute
(defined) and intermediate acute (defined) risk for suicide. The Learning Agenda question
will enable the use of evidence and data to improve VA's understanding of these at-risk
Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.2: (Severely Wounded, III and Injured) VA and the
Defense Department Medical Centers of Excellence partner to share best practices,
including evaluations and treatments and ensure a seamless transition for severely
wounded, ill and injured Service members between DoD and VA.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.2: (Severely
VA Principles
Wounded, III and Injured) ensures
Customize Care
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Caregivers
Access to Resources
DoD clinicians share information and complete a "warm hand-off" with VA clinicians for
transitioning Service members with serious illness, injury, wounds or other disability to
improve their outcomes and ensure quality of life. VA requires employee training and
provides resources to support the delivery of benefits, whole health care and services to
at-risk customers who may need more support, including Service members and Veterans
with treatment resistant conditions, comorbid disorders, serious mental illness and
severely wounded, ill and injured Veterans and their caregivers.
VHA is implementing a national Care Coordination and Integrated Case Management
(CC&ICM) program to integrate and streamline care of Veterans with complex needs.
Page 27 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
CC&ICM aims to improve delivery of health care services by ensuring care coordination
across all settings while reducing waste, decreasing costs and improving Veteran
satisfaction.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.3: (Homelessness) VA will strengthen and build
partnerships across Federal, state, local, Tribal, territorial and private sector organizations
and provide integrated support to homeless Veterans that ensures homelessness is
prevented, curtailed and non-recurring.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy
Reduce Homelessness
2.1.3: (Homelessness) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
Timely Access
Fundamental Principles.
Page 28 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA's priority for Veterans and their
families who are homeless or at risk of
becoming homeless is to help them
obtain permanent and sustainable
housing with access to high-quality
healthcare and supportive services. VA's
MLPs will improve housing conditions or
prevent foreclosure or eviction to help
Veterans and their families avoid
homelessness and ensure homeless
services and outcomes are equitable and
targeted to address the needs of the
most vulnerable.
Moreover, VA ensures homeless Veterans receive the same end of life dignity as other
Veterans. VA will work closely with HUD and the U.S. Interagency Council on
Homelessness to develop and operationalize joint strategies that involve an all-of-
government approach to ending homelessness among Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.4: (Minority Veterans) All Veterans receive equal access
and service regardless of race, origin, religion, gender or sexual identity.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy
Minority Veterans
2.1.4: (Minority Veterans) ensures
Advocacy
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Equity
VA advocates for minority Veterans and serves
as facilitator, change agent and strategic thinker
to foster inter- and intra-agency cooperation and
implement policies and programs that ensure
equity and improve outcomes and experiences
for minority Veterans. The Center for Minority
Veterans (CMV) conducts and sponsors
appropriate social and demographic research to
understand the needs of minority Veterans and
publicizes results of medical research of
significance to minority Veterans. CMV will
leverage opportunities to conduct innovative
participatory cohort research on this Veteran
population to understand the impact of social
determinants of health on access to care and
health outcomes.
Page 28 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.1.5: (Special Emphasis Groups) VA improves environments
of care and addresses equitable access and the unique needs of LGBTQ+, women,
racial, ethnic, religious and/or cultural minorities, those with physical and/or intellectual
disabilities, American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans and homeless Veterans to
ensure all Veterans feel welcome and valued.
stakeholder
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
LGBTQ+
Implementing
Equity
Strategy 2.1.5: (Special Emphasis Groups)
ensures achievement of three VA Secretary
Inclusiveness
Fundamental Principles.
VA ensures a welcoming and inclusive environment in which Veterans feel safe
physically, mentally, socially and emotionally. Points of care are modern and inviting and
an expert workforce delivers care options designed to meet Veterans where they are in
their health journey. VA provides standard and complementary types of care and ensures
equitable access to a full range of experts and specialists to meet the heath care needs of
each unique Veteran.
VA will enhance outreach and data collection for sexual orientation and gender identity for
LGBTQ+ Veterans, women, minorities, MST survivors, Veterans with physical and/or
intellectual disabilities and homeless Veterans. Enhanced outreach and data collection
also will improve VA's sensitivity to religious differences and understanding of the needs
of deported and international Veterans to ensure all Veterans receive the benefits, care,
memorialization and services they earned.
Page 29 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.1.6: (Women Veterans) VA transforms the culture to ensure
women Veterans feel safe and welcome wherever they seek assistance and care.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy
Women Veterans
2.1.6: (Women Veterans) ensures
Equitable Access
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Safe/Harassment Free
VA strives to understand and address the
diverse needs of women Veterans, which
include LGBTQ+, minority, those with
physical and/or intellectual disabilities and
rural populations to improve their access to
quality benefits, care, memorialization,
services and outcomes. VA also will ensure
a safe, welcoming and harassment-free
experience and healthy and supportive
environment for women Veterans
regardless of where they receive care.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.7: (Military-to-Civilian Transition) VA provides holistic
assessments of medical, mental, vocational, educational and economic well-being for all
transitioning Service members, Veterans, their families and caregivers to improve their
economic security, health and quality of life outcomes.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.7: (Military-to-
VA Principles
Civilian Transition) ensures achievement
Military-to-Civilian Transition
of three VA Secretary Fundamental
Principles.
Education, Training, Jobs
Access to Resources
VA collaborates with TAP and interagency partners including DoD, DOL, Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) (Coast Guard), DOE, SBA and OPM to educate transitioning
Service members, Veterans, their families and caregivers about VA benefits and services
365 days prior to separating, 365 days post-separation and beyond. Support services are
based on needs identified for specific life domains: Housing, Benefits, Medical/Health,
Employment and Education. Coordination of VA health care can start prior to military
separation through the VA Liaison and Post-9/11 Military2VA Case Management
Programs.
Page 30 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
supports Economic Development Initiatives
(EDI) to enhance Veteran experience beyond
separation. OTED coordinates with VBA
regional offices, State Departments of
Veterans Affairs, DOL, regional
organizations, non-governmental
organizations and industry leaders and hosts
EDI events in economically distressed
locations with high Veteran populations,
defined as Qualified Opportunity Zones by
the Internal Revenue Service. These events
connect economically disadvantaged Veteran
populations with networking opportunities to
improve their economic wellbeing and
VBA's Office of Outreach, Transition and
provide them with access to VA benefits and
Economic Development (OTED)
services.
Newly separated at-risk Veterans and their families receive consistent and caring support
services and accurate information on benefits and resources available from VA and
partners. VA Solid Start (VASS) prioritizes contact to Veterans who had a mental health
appointment in their last year of active-duty service and provides a warm hand-off to the
VCL and Supportive Services for Veteran Families regardless of their character of
discharge (such as Less than Honorable Discharge). VASS representatives meet
individually with Veterans at three key intervals (90, 180, 365 days post separation) to
help Veterans understand their benefits and connect them with resources. VHA Care
Coordination and Intensive Case Management will be important for newly separated
military transitioning Veterans who have intensive needs due to complex illnesses or
injuries.
Learning Agenda
Evaluation of Transition Assistance Program: VBAs Learning Agenda question focuses
on the military to civilian transition. 2a. To what extent is VA's Transition Assistance
Program (TAP supporting the transition needs of newly separated Veterans?
Service members transitioning from military-to-civilian life often experience a variety of
challenges, including residential moves and adjusting to new surroundings, changes in
household makeup, new jobs or potential periods of unemployment, or service-related
illness or injury. VA will provide accurate VA benefits and services information and
connect transitioning Service members to comprehensive transition support starting 365
days pre separation through 365 days post separation to help them achieve civilian
success.
Page 31 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.1.8: (Rural Veterans) VA increases access to virtual and in-
home health care and promotes Federal and community care solutions to improve well-
being for Veterans in underserved rural areas.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
In-Home Care
Implementing Strategy 2.1.8:
Staff Shortfalls
(Rural Veterans) ensures achievement of
Access to Resources
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
VA's Office of Rural Health (ORH) will expand partnerships with government, private
sector organizations and commercial providers to leverage available facilities and
resources and improve access to care and services. VA and partners collaborate to
develop a strong Veterans transportation system to better serve Veterans and their
families in the communities where they live, enhance research, develop innovative new
models of care for Veterans' who live in rural communities and support initiatives that
reduce rural health care workforce disparities.
A
555X
To enhance rural Veterans' access to care, VA leverages partnerships with other Federal
agencies and community partners in a variety of ways. These collaborations with the
USDA, U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) and U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) (including Indian Health Services (IHS)) facilitate nationwide adoption of
rural provider training programs, rural workforce recruitment programs and the facilitation
of access to virtual and in-person care for rural Veterans. VA actively participates in the
administration's Rural Prosperity and Rural Health Interagency Policy Committees and
the White House Council on Native American Affairs to work with partners across the
country on these rural access programs.
Page 32 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
ORH's enterprise-wide initiatives and promising practices demonstrate its commitment to
increase access and deliver care the way Veterans prefer to receive it and improve well-
being and ensure rural Veterans thrive.52 VHA also grants Full Practice Authority (FPA) to
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses (APRN)53 to increase Veteran access to care. Data
demonstrate that FPA for APRNs has a positive impact on wait times in Mental Health,
Specialty Care and Primary Care.54
Learning Agenda
Access to Care: VHA Question 1: "How can VA ensure that Veterans have access to
timely care in their preferred setting?"
VHA launched a 2-year pilot program in emergency departments and specialty care
clinics to provide medical scribes to providers. VHA will evaluate the impact of the scribes
program on clinical efficiency, patient and provider satisfaction and identify differences
between VA and contract-hired scribes.
VHA collaborated with other research and operations offices and developed scoring
algorithms to identify underserved VA medical facilities in primary care and mental health
services. The algorithms are used to update an annual list of underserved facilities. Each
year, the top 20 underserved facilities are required to develop an action plan explaining
how they intend to improve Veteran access to care at their facilities.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.9: (American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans) VA
consults with government partners and Tribes and incorporates their input into policies
and programs to ensure American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) Veterans have
access to and receive earned benefits, care, memorialization and services.
stakeholder
VA Principles
American Indian and Alaska
consultations
Implementing Strategy 2.1.9:
Native Veterans
(American Indian and Alaska Native
Measure Outcomes
Veterans) ensures achievement of three
Equitable Access
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
VA builds productive, comprehensive relationships and partners with Tribal governments,
Federal agencies; (e.g., HHS/IH S, U.S. Department of the Interior, HUD, U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA), DoD and other organizations to understand customer
experiences and coordinate outreach efforts and service delivery options for AIAN
Veterans living in rural and urban areas. VA will develop a measurable, achievable
enterprise-wide roadmap-wide roadmap for evaluating and addressing the unique needs
and circumstances of this Veteran population.
52 (38 United States Code § 7308 - Office of Rural Health 2006).
53 (38 CFR § 17.415 - Full practice authority for advanced practice registered nurses. 2016).
54 Ruggs, D. et al. 2021. A preliminary evaluation of full practice authority of advance practice registered
nurses in the Veterans Health Administration.
Page 33 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Figure 4. Active-duty members, Veterans and civilians from Texas and members of the Traditional
American Indian Society Honor Guard perform a gourd dance, a traditional American Indian ceremony in
which the ground the dance is held on is blessed, Sept. 30.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.10: (Nutrition and Food Services) VA identifies Veterans
and transitioning Service members at-risk for food insecurity and connects them to
resources, assistance programs and education to improve their health and well-being.
Implementing Strategy 2.1.10: (Nutrition
VA Principles
and Food Services) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
Excellence
Fundamental Principles.
Access to Resources
The VA Nutrition and Food Services (NFS) program office implements the White House
executive focus area of "Health and Well-being," within the White House office of Joining
Forces. Through work in an Interagency Policy Sub-council, NFS supports transitioning
military families with clinical referrals and expands nutrition resources and support
services, education and staff training.
The NFS program office partners with other Federal agencies (USDA and DoD), research
offices, VA programs and non-governmental organizations to address food insecurity and
nutrition. NFS and partners coordinate nutrition care by using electronic health records
(EHR) to screen Veterans for food insecurity, providing clinical referrals in primary care
and other care settings and expanding nutrition resources, support services, education
and staff training.
Page 34 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.2: (Tailored Delivery of Benefits, Care and
Services Ensure Equity and Access) VA and partners will tailor the delivery
of benefits and customize whole health care and services for the recipient at
each phase of their life journey.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 2.2 describes how VA will expand partnerships and use them as a force
multiplier to enhance our capabilities and capacity to deliver quality benefits, care and
services that improve the lives of Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and
Service members based on the five domains of Social Determinants of Health (where
people are born, live, work, attend school and play). 55, 56 VA will provide Veterans with
final resting places and lasting tributes that commemorate their service and sacrifice to
our Nation. We also will strengthen partnerships across the ecosystem of Veteran
supporters and advocate for Veterans to facilitate the transition from military service to
education, employment or entrepreneurship and support our aging Veterans, their
families and caregivers. VA leverages technology to modernize the appeals process,
ensure easy access to secure VA systems and deliver benefits, health care and services
the way Veterans want to receive them.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND LEARNING AGENDA ALIGNMENT
Two strategies in Objective 2.2 align to the Learning Agenda and efforts to understand
specific challenges related to transition, post-military employment and access to care for
underserved Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.3: (Telehealth/Connected Care) aligns with VHA Learning
Agenda priority Question 1 for Access to Care: What are the ways VA can ensure
Veterans have access to timely care in their preferred setting? Both the implementing
strategy and the priority question will improve access to healthcare for Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.3 describes how virtual health technologies and devices
deliver convenient, trusted, anytime and anywhere access that empowers Veterans to
take charge of their own care needs. Connected care addresses geographic barriers and
expands VA's clinical capacity and delivers more comprehensive in-home services. For
example, Veterans can use VA's digital portal to select their preferred communication
channel and connect with VA staff members and health care professionals.
Understanding VHA's Learning Agenda question ensures VA identifies Veterans with
limited access to health care services and leverages telehealth to address shortages of
55 (Department of Health and Human Services n.d.). Social determinants of health are related to the risks
and opportunities associated with where people are born, live, work, attend school or church, it is their
environment that impacts quality of life and outcomes.
56 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). Veterans Health Administration.
Page 35 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
mental, primary and specialty health care and ensure equitable access to VA care and
services.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.6: (Job Readiness and Placement) aligns with Learning
Agenda question 2a: Evaluation of Transition Assistance Program and VBA's efforts to
understand the military-to-civilian transition and the impact to Service members and
recently transitioned Veterans: To what extent is VA's Transition Assistance Program
(TAP) supporting the transition needs of newly separated Veterans?
Implementing Strategy 2.2.6 promotes the building of high-performing partnerships to
enhance Veteran job readiness and placement. VA provides skills assessments, resume
writing assistance, job training, employment accommodations and supports
entrepreneurship and Veteran-owned businesses. VA understands industry trends and
shares information to prepare Veterans for emerging job and business opportunities.
VBA's Learning Agenda could drive research discoveries to understand how multiple
moves and continuous change during the military-to-civilian transition impact a Veteran's
or Service member's ability to obtain or maintain employment and how transition might
influence their health and well-being.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT ALIGNMENT
Three strategies in Objective 2.2 align specifically to VA evaluation activities or studies
described in Addendum D of Appendix E (Capacity Assessment):
Implementing Strategy 2.2.3: (Telehealth/Connected Care):
Spanish Online & Telephone Intervention for Caregivers of Veterans with Stroke.
Effect of Medication Management at Home Via Pharmacy Home Televisits.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.4: (Aging, Frail and End of Life Veterans of All Ages):
Outpatient Palliative Care and Prescribing Safety and Quality at End-of-Life.
Preventing Loss of Independence through Exercise in Community Living Centers
(PLIE-CLC).
Effect of Patient Priorities Care Implementation in Older Veterans with Multiple
Chronic Conditions.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.5: (Families and Caregivers):
Home Excellence Research and Outcomes Center to Advance, Redefine and
Evaluate Non-Institutional Caregiving (HERO CARE).
Page 36 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
2.2 Co-Leads
2.2 Performance Milestones
VBA, OPO
Desired outcomes for Veterans.
NCA, OFO
Improve quality of life for Veterans based on the five domains of
Office of the
Social Determinants of Health:
VA Secretary
-
Economic stability and consistent income.
(OSVA)
-
Access and quality of education and schools.
-
Access to quality, comprehensive health care.
-
Safety and health of neighborhood and environment.
-
Social and community support and interactions.
Improve Veteran well-being.
Honor, respect and care for Veterans and their families at the
final phase of their life journey:
-
Provide reasonable access to VA national or grant-funded
state, territorial or Tribal cemeteries.
-
Maintain high standards of appearance and perpetual care
for those interred and future generations of visitors.
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 2.2.1: (VA Advocates for Veterans) VA collaborates across the
ecosystem of partners and fiercely advocates for all Veterans to improve their outcomes,
equity and quality of life.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.1: (VA
VA Principles
Advocates for Veterans) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
Advocacy
Fundamental Principles.
Timely Access
VA serves as the Nation's premier advocate for Veterans, their families, caregivers,
survivors and Service members and ensures the best possible care and services are
delivered either from VA or the community. To accomplish this, VA builds partnerships to
leverage shared resources and deliver quality benefits, whole health care and accessible
services the way Veterans want to receive them to improve experiences, well-being and
outcomes.
VHA is committed to pursuing public-private partnerships (P3s) and exploring new and
innovative ways to support the mission. To meet large scale and complex challenges
requiring cross-sector solutions and collaboration, VHA's National Center for Healthcare
Advancement and Partnerships engages P3s that leverage the full range of our Nation's
talent, ingenuity and commitment to action to not only further VA's mission and principles
but also build capacity and create platforms for sharing resources to better serve
Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors, Service members and other beneficiaries.
Enhancing community partnerships is an important part of providing excellent customer
Page 37 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
service, restoring public trust and delivering personalized, proactive, patient-driven health
care. 57
Figure 5. The Secretary of VA advocates for Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service
members.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.2: (Whole Health) VA empowers employees to deliver high-
quality whole health care that equips Veterans and supports their health and well-being
by addressing what matters to them most.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.2: (Whole
VA Principles
Health) ensures achievement of three VA
Veterans Outcomes
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Timely Access
Veteran Experience
VHA's Office of Community Care will complement Whole Health and provide Veterans
with access to care from community providers through the Community Care Network
(CCN). The CCN is a high-performing network of community providers that serves as a
seamless extension of VA's own network of facilities. The CCN provides an important
supplement to VHA's care delivery system and a unified experience for Veterans.
57 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). The National Center for Healthcare Advancement and
Partnerships Serves Veterans Through Partnership.
Page 38 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
This supplemental form of access is
integrated within VHA's internal medical
services and acts as the central integrator
to coordinate care and enhance access to
comprehensive health care that improves
quality of life for Veterans. Once enrolled in
VA health care, VA connects Veterans and
Service members to Patient Aligned Care
Teams (PACT) to ensure patient-driven,
proactive, personalized, team-based care
focused on wellness and disease
prevention that improves satisfaction and
health care outcomes for Veterans and
Service members.
VA has long been considered a national leader in telehealth and expanding
our telehealth capabilities is an essential part of our ongoing strategy to
increase Veteran access to care.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough58
Implementing Strategy 2.2.3: (Telehealth/Connected Care) Transformative virtual
health technologies and programs deliver secure, convenient, trusted, anytime and
anywhere access to care for Veterans enhancing the accessibility, capacity, quality and
experience of VA health care for Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Assessment
Veteran Outcomes
Implementing
Timely Access
Strategy 2.2.3: (Telehealth/Connected Care)
ensures achievement of three VA Secretary
Veteran Experience
Fundamental Principles.
VA empowers Veterans to take control of their own health journey, providing digital tools
to support self-management and connecting Veterans and their caregivers to VHA clinical
staff using virtual care technologies. VA's virtual health technologies create a digital "front
door" at http://www.VA.gov that offers a single, equitable entry point and integrated
experience to welcome Veterans and support them as they manage their VA benefits,
their health and health care.
58 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 39 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA promotes ongoing digital modernization
and provision of a harmonized on-line
experience for Veterans. This experience
allows Veterans to easily interact with VA
and choose their preferred communication
channels to connect with VA staff members
and health care professionals to ask
questions, receive care, schedule and
manage appointments, update health
records, monitor medications, refill
prescriptions and more. VA will ensure
telehealth and connected care technologies
are developed and implemented with
cybersecurity and privacy requirements
prioritized to reduce risks to Veterans taking
advantage of these expanded options to
care.
Connected care through telehealth increasingly allows VA to deliver care for Veterans in a
more integrated manner, to include supporting Veterans in their homes and local
communities. It also removes geographic barriers to health care access and expands VA's
clinical capacity across the health care delivery network (e.g., tele-critical care, tele-stroke
clinical resource hubs, expert consultation centers, 59 store and forward telehealth
programs and clinical contact centers). Connected care enhances VA's ability to deliver
consistent and comprehensive services to Veterans regardless of their location.
For example, connected care securely delivers services and self-management tools
directly to a Veteran's home, using VA-issued or Veteran-owned devices, to enhance the
accessibility of care. These services can be augmented by remote physical examination
tools (e.g., digital stethoscope) and touchless sensing technologies that capture biometric
data (e.g., heart rate, respiratory rate) to provide a more comprehensive remote
assessment and better understand patient status between encounters with the healthcare
team. Connected care and modern scheduling workflows allow Veterans to invite family
members, caregivers or other members of their support system to attend both telehealth
and in-person appointments to enhance outcomes and satisfaction for Veterans and
those who care for them and improve the experience for Veterans and VA staff. 60,61
59 Congressional Research Service. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA): A Primer on Telehealth (July 26,
2019)
60 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). VA Connected Care: Expanding Veteran Access to Care Through
Virtual Technologies.
61 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). How Telehealth Works.
Page 40 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Learning Agenda
Access to Care: VHA Question 1: "How can VA ensure that Veterans have access to
timely care in their preferred setting?"
VA implemented the "Anywhere to Anywhere" initiative to increase the use connected
care. VA will study and implement various forms of connected care to reach underserved
Veterans and optimize VA's ability to deliver trusted care, anytime and anywhere. VA will
increase investments in connected care infrastructure and continue efforts to expand the
general knowledge base about connected care, the VHA supply of health care, Veteran
needs and preferences for health care and the best approaches to address them all.
Figure 6. Native American, rural Veterans connect with a nurse.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.4: (Aging, Frail and End of Life Veterans of All Ages) VA
and ecosystem partners deliver long-term support services to help Veterans thrive.
stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Customize Care
Consultations
Assessment
Implementing
Caregivers
Strategy 2.2.4: (Aging, Frail and End of Life
Timely Access
Veterans of All Ages) ensures achievement
of three VA Secretary Fundamental
Principles.
Page 41 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA delivers Long-Term Services and
high-quality nursing home care for those
Supports (LTSS), which include home
Veterans who require it.
care related services and nursing home
care, to eligible aging, frail and end of life
Veterans of all ages. These Veterans
represent all genders, ethnicities, rurality,
at-risk, underserved, marginalized and
special emphasis populations, homeless
and Veterans with various medical
conditions. VA's Aging in Place initiative
increases access and availability to
Home and Community Based Services
(HCBS) to allow Veterans to live either at
home or in the least restrictive
environment possible. VA also provides
The VHA Office of Geriatrics & Extended Care (GEC) will implement six main strategies
to prepare for projected trends and an increasing number of Veterans in need: (1) Expand
Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) for improving Aging in Place, (2)
Modernize Systems for Health Aging, (3) Modernize and Improve Facility-Based Care, (4)
Improve Access with Technology, (5) Increase Geriatric Expertise and (6) Develop Data
Definition and Processes. These six strategies address the recommendations and
challenges of the aging population and health care identified during internal and external
evaluations conducted by the Institute of Medicine, the U.S. Government Accountability
Office (GAO) and the National Academy of Medicine.62
VA will strengthen Veteran Community Partnerships (VCP), a national initiative to ensure
all Veterans and their caregivers have access to the widest range of choices and
services. VCP is a joint project of VHA's GEC, the VHA National Center for Healthcare
Advancement and Partnerships, Rural Health, Mental Health, Care Management and
Social Work, Center for Development and Civic Engagement and Caregiver Support.
VCPs are coalitions of Veterans and their caregivers, VA facilities, community health
providers, private sector organizations and government agencies working together to
foster, seamless access to and transitions among the full continuum of care and support
services in VA and the community.63
VA and the community of partners support Veterans with complex long-term care needs
and their caregivers. Supportive services include transportation or ride share, meals-on-
wheels, home based primary care, daily telephone or in-person wellness checks, respite,
62 (Institute of Medicine 2008). Retooling for an Aging America: Building the Health Care Workforce. The
National Academies Press.
(U.S. Government Accountability Office February 2020). VA Health Care: Veteran's Use of Long-Term Care
is Increasing and VA Faces Challenges in Meeting the Demand; GAO-20-284.
(Fulmer 2021). Terry et al. "Actualizing Better Health Care for Older Adults: Commentary describes six vital
directions to improve the care and quality of life for all older Americans." Health Affairs.
63 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Veteran Community Partnerships.
Page 42 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
adult day health care and skilled nursing services from a Community Living Center (CLC),
State Veteran Home or community nursing home.
Figure 7. 2019 Veterans Day ceremony at the World War Il Memorial in Washington, D.C.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.5: (Families and Caregivers) VA delivers quality services
and promotes the health and well-being of Veterans' eligible family members, survivors,
caregivers and Service members.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy
Families/Caregivers
2.2.5: (Families and Caregivers) ensures
Access to Resources
achievement of two VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Research indicates that there are 5.5 million
military caregivers in the United States and of
that, 1.1 million provide care for Veterans and
Service members. VA provides education,
resources, supportive services, programs and
service excellence to caregivers who improve
the lives of our Nation's Veterans. VA will
partner with DoD, the Veteran caregiver
community and other organizations with
interests in research on caregivers or
caregiving to understand challenges and
develop practical solutions that improve the
financial security, experience, outcomes and
quality of life for Veterans, Service members
and their caregivers.
Page 43 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.2.6: (Job Readiness and Placement) VA builds high-
performing, integrated partnerships with Federal, state, territorial, local, Tribal and
community agencies and organizations to enhance Veteran job-readiness, placement and
Veteran entrepreneurship.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.6: (VA
VA Principles
Welcomes all Veterans) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
Training, Education, Jobs
Fundamental Principles.
Access to Resources
OTED will proactively foster inter- and intra-agency cooperation with USDA, DoD, DOL
and other Federal organizations, State agencies and non-governmental organizations to
help transitioning Service members, Veterans and eligible beneficiaries find job skills
training, educational opportunities and suitable employment to preempt or mitigate
potential socio-economic risks. The Personalized Career Planning and Guidance (PCPG)
program provides tailored education and career services, including resume writing,
interview skills and referrals to VA and community resources unique to the participant's
career and education goals. Beneficiaries can expect a detailed skills assessment
identifying areas of career and/or educational development. Each transitioning Service
member will receive a detailed action plan to achieve their personal goals. 64
The Education Service (EDU) delivers GI Bill
benefits to improve the civilianworkforce's
skillsets by expanding opportunities for
Service members, Veterans and eligible
family members to pursue their academic
goals. This effort enhances the Nation's
economic strength with innovative programs
like the Edith Nourse Rogers STEM
Scholarship and the Veteran Employment
Through Technical Education Courses (VET
TEC) pilot program that support employment
in high demand fields, enriching lives by
giving beneficiaries the tools they need to
further their education and lead fulfilling
careers.
Additionally, in 2021, VA successfully launched the Veteran Rapid Retraining Assistance
Program (VRRAP) established by the American Rescue Plan Act (P.L. 117-2). 65 VRRAP
offers education and training for high-demand jobs to Veterans who are unemployed
because of the COVID-19 pandemic. VRRAP covers education and training programs
approved under the GI Bill and Veteran Employment Through Technology Education
64 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Veterans to Benefit from Personalized Career Planning and
Guidance.
65 American Rescue Plan Act of 2021. Public Law 117-2; March 11, 2021.
Page 44 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Courses (VET TEC) that lead to high-demand jobs. These include associate degrees,
non-college degrees, and certificate programs. 66
Through the VR&E Service, participants also receive job training, employment
accommodations, resume development and job seeking skills coaching from VA
counselors via tele-counseling as well as VetSuccess on Campus (VSOC) sites across
the country. VSOC Counselors provide PCPG for Service members, Veterans and eligible
dependents to help them pursue their education and employment goals.
VHA's Compensated Work Therapy (CWT) program provides evidence-based and
evidence-informed vocational rehabilitation services to help Veterans prepare, obtain and
maintain suitable employment. CWT develops partnerships with business, industry and
government agencies to refer Veteran candidates for employment and provides labor and
employment support to Veterans and employers.67
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged
Business Utilization (OSDBU) supports
entrepreneurship and the use of Service-
Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses
(SDVOSB) and Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses (VOSB) in the VA procurement
process as a prime or subcontractor. As the
VA liaison to the Small Business
Administration, OSDBU is collaborating with
SBA to implement recent legislation
mandating the transfer of the SDVOSB and
VOSB verification function, sharing
information on the process and providing
technical assistance.
(All of OSDBU's other functions, including those mandated by the Small Business Act are
to remain within VA.) Finally, OSDBU also provides training on becoming procurement
ready and hosts multiple events throughout the year that enables SDVOSBs and VOSBs
to gain access to VA and private sector procurement decision makers.
VA shares its understanding of industry trends with Veterans, so they are prepared for
potential employment options and business opportunities. VA's expanded referral network
improves opportunities for employment, education, entrepreneurship, internships and
training for new and growing occupational fields. These opportunities will improve
economic security and financial well-being of Veterans and their families.
66 Veteran Rapid Retraining Assistance Program (VRRAP) (February 14, 2022).
67 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2020). Compensated Work Therapy.
Page 45 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Learning Agenda
Evaluation of the Transition Assistance Program: 2a: To what extent is VA's Transition
Assistance Program (TAP) effectively supporting the transition needs of newly separated
Veterans?
OTED is responsible for the VA/DOD Military to Civilian Framework (M2C Ready) post-
separation goals which is to connect newly separated Service members to eligible
benefits, services and resources they earned.
Veterans deserve access to educational opportunities, training and jobs
worthy of their skills and service so that they can strengthen our
communities and country with their leadership.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough.68
Implementing Strategy 2.2.7: (VA and DoD Collaboration) VA and DoD strengthen
their partnership and provide a single system experience of lifetime services that delivers
customer satisfaction, quality outcomes and value to Veterans, Service members, their
families, caregivers and survivors while improving efficiencies.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.7: (VA and DoD
VA Principles
Collaboration) ensures achievement of three
Access to Resources
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Data and Evidence
Veteran Outcomes
VA and DoD's integrated, Service
member/Veteran centric approach
anticipates needs and provides
consistent access to quality care,
services and comprehensive benefits
across both departments. VA and DoD
share data and knowledge to
continuously improve the effectiveness of
health promotion strategies, build and
automate tools and processes to improve
efficiency, accuracy and operations and
transfer the burden of benefits
administration from Service members
and Veterans to VA and DoD.
68 (McDonough, Denis 2021). Remarks by Secretary Denis R. McDonough.
Page 46 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Improving claims processes ensures a seamless experience for Service members
seeking VA disability benefits prior to discharge Expanding interagency partnerships with
DoD, other Federal and State government agencies and private organizations provides
access to transition assistance services and programs at multiple stages throughout the
Service member/Veteran journey ensuring an easy and personalized transition from
military-to-civilian life and improved outcomes for Veterans.
VA and DoD's joint, evidence-based approach to integrated operations and resource
sharing eliminates duplication to gain efficiencies, realizes cost savings and ensures
accessibility to manage the financial and medical care workload and achieve better
outcomes for Service members and Veterans. This approach includes VA's enterprise
adoption of the same logistics system used by DoD to provide a single, integrated, end-
to-end health care logistics information system to improve patient safety, access and the
quality of care provided. 69
Implementing Strategy 2.2.8: (Decision Reviews and Appeals) VA decision reviews
and appeals decisions for Veteran benefits, care and services are fair, consistent and
timely.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.8: (Decision
Reviews and Appeals) ensures
VA Principles
achievement of two VA Secretary
Excellence
Fundamental Principles.
Access to Resources
VA prioritizes the resolution of legacy appeals while conducting Appeals Modernization
Act (AMA) decision reviews and appeals to ensure Veterans and their families receive
decisions in a timely manner. Under AMA, Veterans may choose from one of three lanes
to have their review and decision on appeals arising out of VHA, VBA, NCA or OGC: (1)
supplemental claim, (2) higher-level review or (3) appeal to the Board. If a Veteran
chooses to appeal to the Board, he or she can choose from one of three dockets: (1)
direct review, (2) evidence submission or (3) hearing requests.
VA is modernizing the decision review and
appeals process through enhancements in
virtual tele-hearing technology, process
improvements and stakeholder
collaboration/partnerships. To help
Veterans and their families choose the
review or appeal option that best suits their
needs, VA will provide clear and concise
information regarding for stakeholder
options.
69 (Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee n.d.).
Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense Joint Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2019-2021.
Page 47 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.2.9: (Veteran Disability) VA modernizes the VA Schedule for
Rating Disabilities (VASRD) to incorporate medical and scientific advancements and
objective criteria for a more accurate basis of evaluations for disability compensation.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.9: (Veteran
VA Principles
Disability) ensures achievement of two
Veteran Outcomes
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Access to Resources
VASRD governs evaluations assigned for service-connected disabilities and updated
criteria allows for disability ratings based on the current level of disability through the
different severity levels or stages of the disability in a Veteran's lifetime. Modernizing the
VASRD will result in evaluations for service-connected disabilities that reflect modern
medicine, benefits that adequately compensate for loss in earning capacity based on a
more contemporary assessment of disability and employment, the addition of necessary
conditions and the removal of obsolete conditions.
VA is piloting a comprehensive military exposure model to consider possible relationships
of in-service environmental hazards to medical conditions to lower the burden of proof for
Veterans impacted by exposures and accelerate the delivery of health care and benefits
they need. The new model will continue to leverage scientific findings from the National
Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine available and relevant scientific
research data, surveillance of Veterans' health outcomes, and adding the review of VA
claims data and military environmental research for trends and identify new concerns.70
Implementing Strategy 2.2.10: (Memorial Services) VA honors and memorializes
Veterans in a dignified and respectful manner.
Implementing Strategy 2.2.10: (Memorial
VA Principles
Services) ensures achievement of two
Dignified Resting
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Place/Lasting Tribute
Access to Resources
NCA provides Veterans and eligible family members with final resting places in national
shrines and with lasting tributes that commemorate their service and sacrifice to our
Nation. VA's Veterans Cemetery Grants Program enables VA to assist States, U.S.
territories and federally recognized Tribal governments establish new Veteran's
cemeteries and expand or improve existing Veterans' cemeteries to complement VA's 155
national cemeteries and provide gravesites for Veterans in areas where VA's national
cemeteries cannot fully satisfy their burial needs.71
NCA also conducts outreach efforts to increase awareness among Service members,
Veterans, family members and caregivers of VA interment and memorial benefits and the
70 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). VA pilots evaluation model to determine potential exposure to
environmental hazards while serving. November 11, 2021.
71 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). Veterans Cemetery Grants Program.
Page 48 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Veterans Legacy Memorial (VLM) application. VLM supports and promotes the Veterans
Legacy Program to provide historical information about Veterans interred or inurned in
VA's National Cemeteries. NCA's Legacy webpage (VLM) is a public facing website that
commemorates our Nation's Veterans through the discovery and sharing of their stories.72
Figure 8. Camp Butler National Cemetery, Springfield, Illinois.
https://www.cem.va.gov/cems/nchp/campbutler.asp.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.3: (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Accessibility
(I-DEA)) VA will enhance understanding of Veteran needs and eliminate
disparities and barriers to health, improve service delivery and opportunities
to enhance Veterans' outcomes, experiences and quality of life.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 2.3 expands VA's understanding of Veterans to customize care and meet the
specific needs of individual Veterans and underserved communities. This expanded
understanding will enable VA to address inequity, health disparities and barriers to access
and opportunities. VA will weave the principles of Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and
Accessibility (I-DEA) into the fabric of our mission and create an organization where all
employees support the cultural transformation to a VA that is more inclusive, diverse,
equitable and accessible to all, especially those from underserved communities.
72 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2019). Veterans Legacy Program.
Page 49 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Inclusion means that every individual who enters a VA facility feels safe, included
and valued. VA will treat all Veterans, employees, families, caregivers, survivors and
Service members with dignity, integrity and respect.
Diversity means that VA strives to leverage the strength and uniqueness that defines
our Veteran and other beneficiary populations, our VA workforce and our country.
VA welcomes all Veterans and other beneficiaries and appreciates the differences,
qualities and attributes that make everyone unique.
Equity means VA intentionally commits to consistent and systematic fair, just and
impartial treatment of all individuals and a just distribution of tools and resources to
give everyone, including those who belong to marginalized and underserved
communities, what is required to enjoy a full, healthy life.
Accessibility means eliminating and reducing barriers in a physical or electronic
space and actively opening opportunities and points of service to all, regardless of
their geographic location to safeguard VA's most vulnerable Veterans' and ensure
access to care and services.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND LEARNING AGENDA ALIGNMENT
Implementing Strategy 2.3.1: (Equity to Marginalized and Underserved
Communities) aligns to one VHA and one VBA Learning Agenda priority question. VHA
question for Access to Care: 1: What are the ways VA can ensure Veterans have access
to timely care in their preferred setting?
VBA LA question for Equity Assessment-Advancing Equity to Underserved Populations:
1a: Are there observed differences in the access to and administration of Pension
benefits for underserved communities?
Implementing Strategy 2.3.1 ensures VA knows all Veterans (LGBTQ+, women,
minorities, rural, those with physical and/or intellectual disabilities and other underserved,
marginalized and vulnerable Veterans) and expands medical capacity, capability and
graduate education to address Veterans' health equity and barriers to care. VA will
expand partnerships and leverage innovation and emerging methodologies to understand
needs and address changing demands. Every employee and partner will deliver care and
services to meet the needs and preferences of Veterans, their families, caregivers,
survivors and Service members. Learning Agenda research aims to help VA learn more
about VHA's supply of health care, Veterans' demand for health care and the best
approaches to address both.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT ALIGNMENT
One implementing strategy in Objective 2.3 aligns to VA evaluation activities/studies
described in Addendum D of the Capacity Assessment (Appendix E): Implementing
Strategy 2.3.2: (Health Equity and Disparities): Racial Bias in a VA Algorithm for High-
Risk Veterans.
Page 50 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
2.3 Co-Leads
2.3 Performance Milestones
Office of the VA
Desired outcomes for I-DEA.
Secretary (OSVA)
Identify disparities and barriers to opportunities and care
VHA, Office of
(establish baseline) with equity assessments.
Health Equity
Remove barriers to opportunity.
(OHE)
Eliminate health disparities and barriers to care.
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 2.3.1: (Equity to Marginalized and Underserved
Communities) Policies and programs address persistent, systemic inequity and barriers
to benefits, care, memorialization and services for marginalized and underserved
communities to strengthen the experience and improve outcomes for all Veterans.
stakeholder
VA Principles
consultations
Equity/Inclusiveness
Implementing Strategy 2.3.1:
Access to Resources
(Equity to Marginalized and Underserved
Veteran Outcomes
Communities) ensures achievement of three
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
VA and the ecosystem of partners deliberately and consciously change the way benefits,
care, memorialization and services are delivered to marginalized and underserved
communities. Every employee and partner will share the responsibility to improve the way
we interact with teammates, Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service
members and deliver care and services to meet their needs and preferences.
VA identifies data and defines measures to recognize barriers to health outcomes, gaps in
benefits, care, memorialization and services and risks to underserved and marginalized
Veterans. VA also will examine existing policies, organizational culture, employee training
and strategic communications to ensure a safe and harassment free environment and
foster a sense of belonging among all Veterans. VA conducts equity assessments to
identify and understand gaps in services and develop tools and institutional access points
for organizations representing marginalized and underserved communities to ensure all
Veterans have easy and consistent access to VA's capacity and resources and the
highest quality of service.73
73 (Executive Order 13985 Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government 2021).
Page 51 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Learning Agenda
Access to Care: VHA question 1: What are the ways VA can ensure Veterans have
access to timely care in their preferred setting?
VA will focus mitigation strategies in three areas to deliver care and services to
underserved communities: personnel-focused (recruit and retain high-need providers),
telehealth-focused (increase telehealth capacity) and infrastructure-focused (increase
physical space, as needed). VA will leverage these studies to address equity and access
to care for underserved and marginalized communities.
Equity Assessment and Advancing Equity to Underserved Populations: VBA question 1a:
Are there observed differences in the access to and administration of Pension benefits for
underserved communities?
The VA Pension program provides monthly payments to wartime Veterans who meet
certain age or disability requirements and who have income and net worth within certain
limits. This priority question will improve VA's understanding of access to and the
administration of Pension benefits for underserved communities to alter policies and
procedures and improve equity.
Implementing Strategy 2.3.2: (Health Equity and Disparities) VA is improving health
equity and reducing disparities to care to ensure access to high-quality care for all
Veterans.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy 2.3.2:
Equity
(Health Equity and Disparities) ensures
Timely Access
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
VA's Office of Health Equity (OHE) is addressing the social and economic determinants of
equity which impact access and quality care, including income, education, life experience,
social context, perceived discrimination and even methods of care delivery. OHE
continues to implement targeted initiatives designed to accelerate the analysis and
improvement of health equity outcomes among Veterans, particularly in response to
disparities identified during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Implementing Strategy 2.3.3: (VA Knows All Veterans) VA endeavors to understand
all Veteran demographic groups to ensure diversity, inclusion and equity and tailor
delivery of benefits, care and services to improve their health outcomes.
VA Principles
Implementing Strategy 2.3.3: (VA Knows All
Equity/Inclusiveness
Veterans) ensures achievement of three VA
LGBTQ+
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Timely Access
Page 52 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA partners with academic affiliates, research affiliated government and nonprofit
organizations to increase participation in research studies and access to clinical trials for
at-risk, marginalized and underserved Veterans to ensure equity and improve their clinical
outcomes. VA also effectively engages all Veterans, such as those in rural areas,
minorities, women, LBGTQ+, those with intellectual and/or physical disabilities and other
underserved Veteran populations to address health disparities and barriers to care.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.4: (Innovative Care) VA will improve
understanding of Veteran specific illnesses and injuries to develop and
adopt innovative new treatments that prevent future illness and enhance
Veteran outcomes.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 2.4 and the strategies associated with it ensure VA will leverage innovation and
research findings to improve operations, experiences, satisfaction and outcomes for
customers. This objective reflects top cross-cutting research priorities that informed
Learning Agenda questions based on VHA research (suicide prevention and opioid pain
treatment) funded through the VHA Office of Research and Development (ORD) including
the more rapid translation of effective programs based on research findings into routine
care settings. VA will develop and implement innovative treatment modalities and pilot
community-based interventions to end Veteran suicide and leverage innovative
technologies to expand access to virtual and in-home care. In addition, VA aspires to
leverage innovation and knowledge translation to improve the quality of care and services
delivered to Veterans and develop pain management treatments that prevent and
alleviate Opioid Use Disorder (OUD).
The transformation of VA health care to achieve a safer, sustainable,
greener, person-centered national health care model requires that VA
leverage innovations in medical technology and clinical procedures.
-VA Secretary Denis McDonough74
74 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 53 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
ent
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND LEARNING AGENDA ALIGNMENT
Implementing Strategy 2.4.1: (Innovative Community-Based Interventions) and VHA
Learning Agenda Question 3 Suicide Prevention: What strategies work best to prevent
suicide among Veterans?
Implementing Strategy 2.4.1 ensures VA improves collaboration and partnerships to
identify innovative new treatments that prevent suicide among Veterans and Service
members. Key VHA Learning Agenda strategies are based on the ORD research
roadmap for suicide prevention, which includes the study of strategies to determine the
most effective interventions and the translation strategies to implement and sustain them.
Notably, Implementing Strategy 2.4.1 includes Caring Contacts/Caring Letters, which
provides communication strategies that leverage medical record data to connect with
Veterans and assess outcomes including all-cause mortality, inpatient psychiatric
admissions, outpatient mental health visit days, emergency department visits, missed
appointments and suicide attempts.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.3 (Opioid Use Disorder) and VHA Learning Agenda
Question 2: Pain Management and Opioids: What are the ways VHA can provide clinically
appropriate pain management to Veterans while simultaneously decreasing dependence
on opioids?
Implementing Strategy 2.4.3 drives improved collaboration across the ecosystem of
partners to leverage shared data, randomized clinical trials and other research findings
Page 54 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
derived from ORD-supported studies to enhance our understanding of existing and
potential treatments for chronic pain and OUD. VHA's Learning Agenda will implement
the Stratification Tool for Opioid Risk Mitigation (STORM) to inform VHA's best practice
guidelines on pain management. Research discoveries may lead to alternative treatments
that alleviate chronic pain and reduce the risk of OUD.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.4: (Military Environmental Exposure) aligns to two VHA
Learning Agenda questions for Military Environmental Exposure:
4. To what extent have toxic military exposures harmed Veterans during their period of
service harmed Veterans, especially with regard to latent or chronic adverse health
effects?
5. What are the best strategies to implement state of the art evaluation and care models
to provide effective care for Veterans exposed to burn pit smoke and other military-related
airborne hazards?
Implementing Strategy 2.4.4 and Learning Agenda questions 4 and 5 expand research
and drive improved collaboration among VA research partners to identify the necessary
information to associate Veterans' illnesses to exposure to environmental hazards during
military service. This collaboration will improve VA's understanding of military-related
exposures and the impact to Veterans' health to ensure VA delivers the benefits, care and
services Veterans earned that improves their quality of life, health and well-being.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT ALIGNMENT
Evidence and evaluation efforts across VHA are widespread with no single organization
directing or coordinating activities. VA's Capacity Assessment describes basic science,
clinical, rehabilitation and health services research evaluations to inform policies and
programs, advance knowledge and generate evidence to improve Veterans' health and
well-being. Clinical and/or research-focused evaluation generates evidence and
operations-focused quality improvement evaluation assesses the effectiveness and
sustainment of new programs or policies in real-world settings.
All four strategies in Objective 2.4 align to evaluation activities or studies in Addendum D
of VA's Capacity Assessment (Appendix E):
Implementing Strategy 2.4.1: (Innovative Community-Based Interventions) to
develop innovative treatment modalities, pilot community-based interventions and to
spread strong practices across the enterprise:
The research study identified in the Capacity Assessment (Addendum D) also will
drive achievement of Implementing Strategy 2.4.1. Evaluating the Use of Peer
Specialists to Deliver Cognitive Behavioral Social Skills Training.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.2: (Innovation, Emerging Methods) to implement
innovative research in the discovery and clinical effectiveness of novel treatments and
their implementation and impact on Veteran health.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.3: (Opioid Use Disorder) to implement randomized clinical
trials and other studies, share data and use research findings and evidence to inform pain
Page 55 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
management guidelines for VA, DoD and community practitioners. Four evaluation
studies include:
Long-Term Opioid Therapy: Screen to Evaluate and Treat (Opioid-SET).
Complementary and Integrative Health for Pain in the VA: A National
Demonstration Project (NIH-VA-DOD Joint Initiative).
Targeting Barriers to Pain Self-Management in Women Veterans: Refinement and
Feasibility of a Novel Peer Support Intervention (Project CONNECT).
Risks of Cannabis Use Among Veterans on Long-term Opioid Therapy.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.4: (Military Environmental Exposure): Collaborative
Specialty Care for Gulf War Illness.
2.4 Co-Leads
2.4 Performance Milestones
VHA, Office of
Desired outcomes for innovation.
Research and
Develop and disseminate innovative new and/or potential
Development (ORD)
treatments for Opioid and Substance Use Disorder.
VHA, Innovation
Integrate innovative technologies to expand care
Ecosystem
modalities and improve care delivery outcomes.
VHA, Office of
Develop and implement a system to specifically address
Mental Health &
the health concerns of Veterans who experienced military
Suicide Prevention
environmental exposures.
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 2.4.1: (Innovative Community-Based Interventions) VA and
partners provide innovative and state-of-the-art mental health care to prevent suicide and
promote Veterans' and Service members' health outcomes and quality of life.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Suicide Prevention
consultations
TILIT
Assessment
Implementing Strategy
Veteran Outcomes
2.4.1: (Innovative Community-Based
Interventions) ensures achievement of two VA
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
VA's Office of Mental Health & Suicide Prevention (OMHSP) provides technical
assistance and engages VA's Centers of Excellence, including the National Center for
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, 75 VA Center for Integrated Healthcare (CIH)76 and the
Mental Illness Research and Education and Clinical Center77 to develop innovative
treatment modalities, pilot community-based interventions and to spread strong practices
across the enterprise. Using both formal and informal community partnerships, OMHSP
75 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.) National Center for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).
76 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.) Center for Integrated Healthcare.
77 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center.
Page 56 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
will implement evidence-based clinical strategies for interventions that connect and
engage Veterans through multiple touch points. This model strengthens VA's focus on
high-risk individuals in health care settings to meet Veterans where they live, work and
thrive. VA provides a continuum of forward-looking outpatient, residential and inpatient
mental health services across the country to ease Service members' transition back into
civilian life and provide continued support over their lifetime.
"We will continue to invest and share resources with community
organizations who are in the fight against Veteran suicide and in data-driven,
evidence-based, results oriented initiatives known to help reduce suicide. "
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough78
Learning Agenda
Suicide Prevention: VHA question 3. What strategies work best to prevent suicide among
Veterans?
VA's Learning Agenda prioritizes suicide reduction research and emphasizes the need for
program evaluations to improve suicide prevention for Veterans. Research will help VA
identify clinical interventions to reduce suicide risk and the best modalities to deliver VHA
suicide prevention health care. Two studies align to this strategy to build evidence for the
suicide prevention Learning Agenda question:
The Randomized Evaluation of Caring Letters initiative will evaluate the effectiveness of
Caring Letters among VCL callers, assessing the impact on clinical outcomes and VA
utilization rates by comparing the contact group with rates from a comparable historical
cohort of Veteran callers to the VCL, as well as sustainability of implementing and
maintaining the VCL Caring Letters project.
Through the Recovery Engagement and Coordination for Health - Veterans Enhanced
Treatment (REACH VET) initiative, VHA will leverage predictive modeling and medical
records data to identify Veterans who are at highest statistical risk for suicide in the next
month. Coordinators and providers will work with the Veteran to determine if enhanced
care would be effective.
78 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 57 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.4.2: (Innovation, Emerging Methods) VA incorporates
emerging and innovative methods and technologies to better understand needs and
improve the delivery of benefits, care and services to Veterans, Service members, their
families, caregivers and survivors.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Excellence
Assessment
Implementing Strategy 2.4.2:
Veteran Outcomes
(Innovation, Emerging Methods) ensures achievement
of two VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
The VHA Innovation Ecosystem (VHA IE), ORD, the Office of Academic Affiliates (OAA)
and ORD's Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI) enables the discovery,
evaluation and dissemination of mission-driven health care innovation to advance care
delivery and service. VHA's ORD funds innovative research in the discovery and clinical
effectiveness of novel treatments and their implementation and impact on Veteran health.
ORD QUERI drives the implementation of effective innovations into real-world practice
including telemedicine outreach for PTSD, supportive housing and patient-aligned care
teams for Veterans experiencing homelessness, home-based cardiac rehabilitation
program, caregiver support programs, collaborative care for women Veterans and lung
cancer screening. 79
VHA drives the application of emerging
technologies, such as 3D printing, genomics,
robotics, Artificial Intelligence, personalized
medicine, virtual reality and augmented
reality to improve outcomes and expand
I
access to virtual and in-home care (e.g.,
telemedicine or telehealth, laboratory
services) and regularly reevaluates
performance to understand the efficacy of
these innovations. VA measures outcomes
from implementation of innovations to better
replicate strategies that promote the best
care and improve health and well-being for
more Veterans.
VA works with public health partners (Centers for Disease Control, (CDC)/HHS, state and
local public health departments) to identify and respond to infectious diseases and non-
communicable diseases of public health importance among Veterans. Partnerships to
prevent such illnesses through ongoing surveillance, health promotion, moderation of
social or environmental factors, emerging pathogen, disaster preparedness, vaccination
79 U.S. Government Accountability Office. VA Health Care: Efforts to Prioritize and Translate Research into
Clinical Practice. GAO-20-211. (January 23, 2020).
Page 58 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
and rapid diagnosis and treatment of such illnesses will improve public health and
outcomes for Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.3: (Opioid Use Disorder) VA partners to identify Veterans
and Service members vulnerable to opioid use disorder and develops personalized
interventions to prevent or address adverse outcomes from opioid-related dependency
and improve Veterans' health and quality of life.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Customize Care
Assessment
Implementing Strategy
Veteran Outcomes
2.4.3: (Opioid Use Disorder) ensures achievement
of two VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
The physical and psychological stressors unique to military service and the transition from
military to civilian life are associated with risk for Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) among
Veterans and Service members. VA and the ecosystem of partners will collaborate to
perform randomized clinical trials and other studies to develop and implement innovative
pain management treatments and share data to understand the impact of existing and
potential treatments (including medication-based ones) for chronic pain and OUD.
Research findings and evidence will inform pain management guidelines for VA, DoD and
community practitioners as well as optimizing implementation strategies to expand access
to treatments that improve outcomes for Veterans and Service members.
Learning Agenda
Pain Management and Opioids: VHA question 2: "How can VHA provide clinically
appropriate pain management to Veterans while simultaneously decreasing dependence
on opioids?"
VHA's Learning Agenda implements three strategies derived from the ORD research
roadmap on opioid/pain treatment to better understand pain management and opioid use
and identify evidence and evidence gaps:
STORM uses case reviews and a stepped-wedge cluster randomized design to help
clinical providers identify Veterans vulnerable to negative opioid-related outcomes and
provide personalized interventions. The STORM randomized program evaluation pulls
demographic, diagnostic, pharmacy and health care utilization data to assesses Veteran
mortality and opioid-related injuries, using case reviews and a stepped-wedge cluster
randomized design.
Page 59 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Figure 9. The War Related Illness and Injury Study Center offers Veteran education classes via telehealth
on chemical exposure subject.
Implementing Strategy 2.4.4: (Military Environmental Exposure) VA and partners
pursue research and implement studies to establish a holistic approach for military toxic
exposure presumption and deliver benefits, care and services that improves quality of life
for Veterans.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Access to Resources
Implementing Strategy 2.4.4: (Military
Data and Evidence
Environmental Exposure) ensures achievement of
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
VA is fully committed to providing benefits, health care and services to Veterans exposed
to environmental hazards during their service to the Nation. For medical conditions that
develop after military service, particularly in areas of environmental exposure, the
information needed to connect these conditions to military service is often incomplete. We
need additional research and discovery to address knowledge gaps and incomplete
scientific and medical evidence to establish a comprehensive understanding of in-service
exposures and determine whether they caused a particular condition or conditions. VA is
committed to working with partners such as DOL, the National Cancer Institute, NIH and
the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine and others across the
research spectrum to actively build relationships and investigate additional science for
Page 60 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
exposure issues. These issues loom large for all Veterans whose exposures to airborne
and other environmental hazards may result in unknown long-term health impacts.
80
Learning Agenda
Military Environmental Exposure: VHA question 4: To what extent have military
environmental exposures harmed Veterans during their period of service harmed
Veterans, especially with regard to latent or chronic adverse health effects?
Military Environmental Exposure: VHA question 5: What are the best strategies to
implement state of the art evaluation and care models to provide effective care for
Veterans exposed to burn pit smoke and other military-related airborne hazard?
VHA's Learning Agenda questions are derived from the ORD Military Exposure Research
Program (MERP), which will focus on generating and translating evidence-based
knowledge for Veterans with toxic exposure. The Learning Agenda questions will
address:
Toxic environmental exposure during military service to understand exposure-related
concerns of deployed Veterans.
Access to ongoing research and data investigating the associations between toxic
exposures and the long-term health effects to evaluate best practices and inform an
evidence-based approach for optimizing health.
Identifying the representational cohort of Veterans exposed is essential to
conducting successful program and policy evaluation.
VA collaboration teams will document best practices, create dashboards for metrics
and facilitate best practices implantation across identified medical centers.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.5: (Value and Sustainability) VA, with
community partners, will deliver integrated care and services, balancing
resources to ensure sustainability while continuing to deliver value and
improve health and well-being outcomes of Veterans.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 2.5 ensures the long-term sustainability of VA for future generations of
Veterans. VA measures the quality of services provided based on outcomes to Veterans,
Service members and their eligible beneficiaries and provides value to Veterans today
and in the future. VA understands trends and projects needs to prepare for future
demands and shifts resources to align investments with demographics and geographic
locations. VA expands partnerships across government and private sector organizations
80 Statement of Denis McDonough Secretary of Veterans Affairs Department, Before the Senate Committee
on Veterans' Affairs, U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs Budget Request for FY 2022 (June 16, 2021).
Page 61 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
to enhance our ability to deliver benefits, care, memorialization and services every day
and in times of crisis.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT ALIGNMENT
VA's Capacity Assessment describes ORD's efforts to accelerate adoption of evidence
into practice, fund its clinicians or doctoral-level employees to conduct rigorous research
across the translation spectrum, from basic biomedical research to rehabilitation, clinical
and health services research. These efforts align to Implementing Strategy 2.5.3:
(Enhanced Medical Capacity and Capability) to increase Veterans' access to high-
quality clinical trials and advance research to improve quality of life and outcomes for
Veterans.
2.5 Lead
2.5 Performance Milestones
VHA, Center for Care
Desired outcomes for value and sustainability:
and Payment Innovation
Improve health outcomes for Veterans and other
beneficiaries.
Improve collaboration and coordination across the
health care ecosystem.
Increase efficiencies and reduce health care costs.
With the Veteran at the center of their own care, VA will work to achieve the
right balance between care provided in the community and care provided
through VA to ensure Veterans have timely access to the highest quality
health care services.
-VA Secretary Denis McDonough81
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 2.5.1: (Direct/Community Care Access) VA will carefully
balance personalized care that meets the needs and preferences of Veterans and other
beneficiaries with the capacity available through VA's direct care system, our Community
Care Network and government, academic and other strategic partners.
Implementing Strategy 2.5.1:
VA Principles
(Direct/Community Care Access) ensures
Access to Resources
achievement of three VA Secretary
Excellence
Fundamental Principles.
Improve Management
VA serves as the coordinator of Veterans health care and collaborates with partners to
ensure the timely access to quality preventive, acute and chronic care whether provided
81 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 62 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
within or outside VA. Key components of access include the time it takes to receive care
in the VA system and in the community and barriers and accelerators to receiving care,
such as distance, the availability of technology and ensuring a culturally competent
experience in the community.
VA understands each Veterans health care history and projects their needs to prepare for
future demands for health care services and ensures convenient access, quality
experiences and improved outcomes for Veterans. VA aligns points of care and services
with projected needs across Veteran demographics and geography and considers risks to
sustainability to deliver value to Veterans and ensure future generations of Veterans are
also provided with a range of integrated health care options and the opportunity to choose
the care they trust throughout their lifetime. The Care Coordination & Integrated Case
Management (CC&ICM) program will collaborate with Community Care Network to
integrate Veteran care.
We need to tackle longstanding issues that are essential to the Department's
ability to sustainably and effectively execute its mission.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough82
82 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 63 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.5.2: (Sustainability) VA understands future trends to optimize
the Veteran health care system and shares resources which include staffing, space,
infrastructure and technology to provide quality and accessible health care that improves
outcomes for Veterans and other beneficiaries while ensuring effective use of taxpayer
funds and sustainability for future generations of Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.5.2:
VA Principles
(Sustainability) ensures achievement of
Access to Resources
three VA Secretary Fundamental
Veteran Outcomes
Principles.
Management
VA understands the continuing evolution of Veteran health care and major trends and
events in the national and global health ecosystem and aligns health care and service
investments with projected Veteran care needs across demographics and geographic
locations. As Veteran needs, preferences and populations shift over time, VA will identify
strategic opportunities to align resources with Veteran needs and increase health care
access points in locations where the demand for VA health care services is not being met.
VA will actively manage resources to recognize potential savings and leverage
efficiencies to ensure investments improve innovation, the employee experience and
deliver value to Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 2.5.3: (Enhanced Medical Capacity and Capability) VA will
enhance the Nation's innovation, research, medical and allied health care capacity and
capability to educate and train the next generation of health care practitioners and ensure
Veterans and other beneficiaries' equitable access to the Nation's top health, academic
and research professionals.
Stakeholder
VA Principles
Capacity
Access to Resources
Assessment
Veteran Outcomes
Implementing Strategy
2.5.3: (Enhanced Medical Capacity and Capability)
Pandemic
ensures achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
VHA's Office of Academic Affiliations (OAA) will create new VA post graduate residencies
for Medical Doctors and Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine83 and establish new
partnerships with academic affiliates, professional and nonprofit organizations and all
licensed allied health care professionals (Doctor of Philosophy, Registered Nurse, Doctor
of Nursing Practice, Registered Pharmacist, Doctor of Acupuncture and Oriental
Medicine, Doctor of Psychology, etc.) to encourage clinical professionals to work for VA
and expand training and education opportunities to meet the growing health care needs of
Veterans and the Nation.
83 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Office of Academic Affiliations, To Educate for VA and the Nation.
Page 64 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
OAA will work to establish new partnerships with health care and government
organizations, such as the American Association of Colleges of Nursing%/Commission on
Collegiate Nursing Education85 and Allied Health Professionals86 to identify, understand,
treat and prevent diseases and disorders. New collaborations with government
organizations, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases87 DHS, HHS and local U.S. Public Health
and Community Health Services are critically important to protecting the health of
Veterans and defending the Nation from future pandemics and bioterrorism.
ORD will continue to make substantive
progress toward an enterprise-wide
approach to advancing its three strategic
priorities: increasing Veterans' access to
high-quality clinical trials, increasing the
substantial real-world impact of VA
research and putting VA data to work for
Veterans. In addition, we will advance
research on our cross-cutting priorities:
suicide prevention; pain management and
opioid use; traumatic brain injury (TBI);
posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD); Gulf War illness and military
exposures; and precision oncology.
The VHA Simulation Learning, Evaluation, Assessment and Research Network
(SimLEARN) will ensure Veterans have access to the Nation's top healthcare
professionals through workforce education and training efforts, including cross-cutting
training, knowledge management and learning delivery and infrastructure initiatives.
SimLEARN will enhance the capabilities of frontline staff through the coordination of all
national VHA simulation-based clinical education products and activities and supporting
enterprise level innovative healthcare solutions that advance the standard of clinical
learning and simulation.
I am committed to protecting VA's workforce and those interacting with the
workforce while ensuring continuity of mission critical and essential
services as part of the Nation's overall response and preparedness efforts
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough88
84 (American Association of Colleges of Nursing n.d.). About AACN.
85 (American Association of Colleges of Nursing 2021). Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education.
86 (Association of Schools Advancing Health Professionals 2020). What is Allied Health.
87 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention n.d.). Emerging Infections Program.
88 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 65 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Figure 10. Along with administering health care, benefits and Veterans' cemeteries, VA's Fourth Mission is to respond
to
disasters and national emergencies. Learn how VA supports emergency management, public health, safety and
homeland security efforts. https://www.va.gov/vhaemergencymanagement
Implementing Strategy 2.5.4: (Emergency Management/Fourth Mission) VA uses its
vast infrastructure, technology and resources, geographic reach, deployable assets and
health care expertise to significantly contribute and support the Federal emergency
response and recovery efforts in times of national emergencies and natural disasters.
stakeholder
VA Principles
consultations
Veteran Outcomes
Implementing Strategy 2.5.4:
(Emergency Management/Fourth Mission) ensures
Access to Resources
achievement of two VA Secretary Fundamental
Principles.
As part of VA's Fourth Mission, VA aligns its facilities, infrastructure, policies, processes,
programs and systems to provide mission assurance of care, services and force
protection of people and assets while building a culture of readiness, accountability and
resilience. In addition, VA will support and partner with other agencies and organizations
working with Veterans at the Federal, state, local, Tribal and territorial levels on a day-to-
day basis and in times of crisis to ensure continuity of operations and the consistent
delivery of benefits, care, memorialization and services to Veterans and other
beneficiaries.
Page 66 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 2.5.5: (Value-Based Health Care) VA's value-based health care
model ensures hospitals/health care systems and clinicians deliver personalized services,
team-based care and enhanced care coordination and ensures compensation is based on
reduced costs, improved efficiencies and health outcomes for Veterans and other
beneficiaries.
Implementing Strategy 2.5.5: (Value-Based
VA Principles
Health Care) ensures achievement of three
Access to Resources
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
Management
VA is uniquely positioned in the U.S. health care system to serve as a payer and provider
of services. The VHA Center for Care and Payment Innovation (CCPI) is responsible for
the implementation and evaluation of care and payment innovation, authorized by section
152 of the VA Maintaining Internal Systems & Strengthening Integrated Outside Networks
Act of 2018 (MISSION Act), codified at 38 U.S.C. § 1703E (as implemented by 38 C.F.R.
§ 17.450). Through this authority, CCPI leads national initiatives to test and implement
value-based care models and reduce expenditures while preserving or enhancing the
quality of care furnished by the Department. Through its approach, CCPI works to
improve Veterans' access to care and services; improve quality, timeliness and patient
satisfaction; and create cost savings for the Department.
VHA's Health Services Research & Development (HSR&D) program, under ORD, notably
through the Center of Innovation for Veteran-Centered and Value-Driven Care is driving
the move towards value-based health care and focusing on:
Promoting Veteran-centric care and improving patient experiences in VA
healthcare and community settings.
Advancing value-driven care by providing Veterans the highest quality care at
lowest financial burden.
The Innovation Ecosystem's Center for Care and Payment Innovation is leading national
initiatives focused on innovative value-based payment models. Value-based care is
defined as health outcomes achieved per dollar spent and ensures VA uses evidence to
assess the quality of health care delivered. Performance is based on reduced costs and
improved efficiencies and health outcomes for Veterans and other beneficiaries.
Page 67 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA and operational partners will
emphasize quality and high-
value care to promote more
impactful outcomes for Veterans,
including perceptions that care is
more patient-centered, increased
engagement with health care,
self-care and improving
perceived stress, which indicates
improvements in overall well-
being.
VA will leverage comparative effectiveness research for a faster, cost-efficient way to
determine whether a treatment is effective and how the effectiveness varies for Veterans
with complex chronic conditions. It compares existing treatments to see what works best
and what poses the greatest benefits and harms for different patients or patient groups.
Statistical research assists our other high-value research goals. This effort includes
developing a new generation of statistical methods to better identify the patient, provider
and system characteristics associated with higher costs, developing innovative theoretical
concepts for measuring cost and adapting existing statistical methods to new uses to
understand the comparative effectiveness of difficult research questions.89
89 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). Advancing Value-Driven Care.
Page 68 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIC GOAL 3. VA builds and maintains trust with
Stakeholders through proven stewardship, transparency and
accountability.
GOAL DESCRIPTION
Goal 3 ensures VA's culture of accountability drives ethical behavior and trust across the
organization and throughout the ecosystem of partners. VA listens to Veterans, other
beneficiaries and employees and serves as their trusted agent. Veterans, their families,
caregivers, survivors and Service members trust VA to deliver timely, high-quality
benefits, care, memorialization and services. Employees trust VA to uphold our core
values and customer experience principles and swiftly address ethical failures and
breach of trust.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3.1: (VA is Transparent and Trusted) VA will be
the trusted agent for service and advocacy for our Nation's heroes,
caregivers, families, survivors and Service members to improve their quality
of life and ensure end of life dignity.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
VA serves as the trusted agent for Veterans, other beneficiaries and employees and sets
the standard of performance that others aspire to achieve. VA willingly and routinely
shares performance information publicly and actively solicits feedback from Veterans,
their families, caregivers, survivors and Service members to ensure transparency and
improve performance.
3.1 Co-Leads
3.1 Performance Milestones
Office of
Desired outcomes for transparency and trust:
Enterprise
Veterans trust VA.
Integration (OEI)
Increase information sharing and performance reporting to
VEO
improve transparency.
Improve employees' and Veterans' satisfaction with VA
integrity.
Page 69 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 3.1.1: (Voice of Veterans) VA actively incorporates the voice of
the Veteran obtaining their insights to improve services, transparency of outcomes and
trust.
Implementing Strategy 3.1.1: (Voice of
VA Principles
Veterans) ensures achievement of three
Excellence
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
Trust
VA is committed to fostering an inclusive environment where the experiences,
perspectives, talents and ideas of our diverse Veteran population are valued. VA will use
the best practices of HCD to enable Veterans to easily voice their opinions, raise
concerns, report violations and provide other types of valuable input. Incorporating the
voice of the Veteran also enables VA to bring together local communities, Federal, state,
territorial and Tribal officials to answer questions; connect Veterans, Service members,
families, caregivers and survivors to available resources; and deliver the benefits, care,
memorialization and services they earned and deserve.
Implementing Strategy 3.1.2: (Transparency) VA publicly shares information to
demonstrate performance when compared to industry standards and partners to increase
community awareness, transparency and public information sharing.
Implementing Strategy 3.1.2: (Transparency)
VA Principles
ensures achievement of two VA Secretary
Excellence
Fundamental Principles.
Trust
VA expands outreach to inter- and intra-
agencies, VSOs and Veterans to ensure
transparency and strengthen
intergovernmental partnerships and
collaborations. Partnerships with law
enforcement agencies will increase
transparency, cooperation and VA's
capabilities to support programs and lines
of business (LOB) to detect and prevent
fraud, waste and abuse (FWA). Examples
of LOBs include VBA Services such as
Compensation & Pension (C&P), Loan
Guaranty, VR&E, Education and
Insurance.
Increased scope and capabilities will also benefit many VBA initiatives which include C&P
efforts for insider threats & disability, Predictive Fraud Prevention Model Enhancements, a
Page 70 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
pilot for VBA's new FWA preventive data analytics lab and the National VBA Call Center
Enhanced Security for the detection and prevention of FWA.
The independent Office of Inspector General (OIG) will publish all reports in accordance
with law and privacy requirements to ensure transparency, promote proper stewardship of
taxpayer resources and positively impact the delivery of benefits, health care and services
to Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service members.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3.2: (Internal and External Accountability) VA
will continue to promote and improve organizational and individual
accountability and ensure a just culture.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
VA's culture of integrity and no reprisal philosophy ensures individual and organizational
accountability and proper stewardship of resources. Employees, contractors and third-
party providers are trained properly and understand expectations for their performance
and behavior and standards are fairly enforced internally and externally across the
ecosystem of partners. VA provides a safe environment to disclose allegations of
misconduct or other wrongdoing and employees feel protected from whistleblower
retaliation. Employees are confident VA will support their ability to speak up and swiftly
and fairly hold individuals accountable for misconduct, fraud, waste and abuse and non-
VA entities held accountable to strict criteria to protect Veterans and other beneficiaries.
3.2 Co-Leads
3.2 Performance Milestones
VHA, Office of Integrity and
Desired outcomes for accountability:
Compliance
Reduce fraud, waste and abuse (FWA).
Office of Accountability &
Employees feel safe from retaliation.
Whistleblower Protection (OAWP)
VA holds employees and external
Office of Management (OM), Office of
partners accountable for standards.
Business Oversight (OBO)
Page 71 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 3.2.1: (Internal, External Accountability) VA ensures leaders,
employees and external partners understand standards and VA rewards and disciplines
fairly and equitably to ensure accountability and improve performance and customer
service outcomes.
VA Principles
Implementing Strategy 3.2.1: (Internal,
External Accountability) ensures
Trust
achievement of three VA Secretary
Quality/Effectiveness
Fundamental Principles.
Accountability
VA sets quality and performance standards to provide oversight and guide operations and
regularly reports the outcomes of our efforts across the ecosystem of partners and to VA
governance boards to improve performance. Employees, contractors and third-party
providers are appropriately trained and held accountable to VA standards and VA
maintains sound fiscal stewardship to optimize resources and improve outcomes for
Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors and Service members.
Implementing Strategy 3.2.2: (Protecting Whistleblowers) VA promotes accountability
by protecting whistleblowers.
Implementing Strategy 3.2.2: (Protecting
VA Principles
Whistleblowers) ensures achievement of
Accountability
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Trust
Excellence
VA's Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection (OAWP) trains employees and
stakeholders about whistleblower rights and protections, provides advice to the Secretary
to enable a transparent culture for employees, conducts investigations and makes
recommendations for discipline to promote accountability for whistleblower retaliation. All
VA supervisors are accountable through the performance management system to
promote an environment where employees are encouraged to raise concerns. 90
90 115th Congress. S.1094, Department of Veterans Affairs Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act
of 2017.
Page 72 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 3.2.3: (Culture of Integrity) VA promotes a "duty to speak up,"
"no reprisal" philosophy and leverages internal controls to ensure transparency,
accountability and proper stewardship of resources.
Implementing Strategy 3.2.3: (Culture of
VA Principles
Integrity) ensures achievement of three
Accountability
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Excellence
Trust
VA's culture of integrity builds off the Federal employee's Code of Conduct and
emphasizes VA's responsibility to operate with the highest principles and ethical business
standards in service of VA's missions, including our everyday interactions with one
another. Establishing a culture of integrity also means promoting ongoing and
comprehensive feedback to allow for early identification of problems to address them
immediately. A culture of integrity and "no reprisal" philosophy promotes accountability,
consistency and proper stewardship of resources by employees and contractors to further
high-quality benefits, care and services to Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors
and Service members.
VA continues to establish standards and processes that have integrity and monitor their
implementation with robust internal controls, oversight and governance.
VA strengthens a culture of integrity and
improves data and reporting structures to
identify and address known risks and issues.
VA continues to strengthen its capacity to
monitor for fraud, waste and abuse as part of a
broader commitment to challenge each
employee and operational unit throughout the
Department to serve with the highest of
integrity and manage their responsibilities
within their span of control and level of
authority. Collectively, these actions also
demonstrate VA's commitment to address the
issues identified in GAO's High Risk Report,
including addressing inadequate oversight and
accountability.
Page 73 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 3.2.4: (Fraud, Waste and Abuse) VA swiftly addresses
allegations of fraud, waste and abuse and systems and processes allow for easy
identification, remediation, reporting and suspension or even debarment.
VA Principles
Implementing Strategy 3.2.4: (Fraud, Waste
and Abuse) ensures achievement of three VA
Excellence
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Accountability
Management
VA leverages internal controls to ensure the integrity of financial and non-financial data
and promote transparency, consistency and accountability. VA acquisitions and logistics
ensure fiscal accountability and prompt reporting to prevent fraud, waste and abuse. OIG
investigates allegation or indications of misuse of VA-appropriated funds to ensure
responsible use of taxpayer resources and advance efforts to hold responsible individuals
accountable. 91
Implementing Strategy 3.2.5: (Organizational and Individual Accountability) VA
ensures audits, inspections, reviews and investigations improve organizational and
individual performance and promote accountability.
Implementing Strategy 3.2.5: (Organizational
VA Principles
and Individual Accountability) ensures
Accountability
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Trust
Veteran Outcomes
VA will leverage OIG audits, inspections, reviews and investigations to detect
mismanagement, misconduct, corruption and other criminal behavior and hold
employees, contractors and others accessing VA resources accountable. VA will use the
findings from OIG efforts to understand root causes, develop and implement new
procedures, practices and measures to address them and report our progress towards
improving programs and services for Veterans. Furthermore, the GAO high risk list will
help VA understand potential vulnerabilities within the organization to prevent, avoid or
mitigate emerging risks. OIG trains its employees to perform objective, independent
criminal and administrative investigations, inspections, reviews and audits and adhere to
the highest standards of performance to ensure accountability and transparency and
positively impact the delivery of benefits care and services to Veterans, their families,
caregivers, survivors and Service members.
OAWP conducts fair and unbiased administrative investigations for matters that involve
allegations of senior leader misconduct, neglect of duty and poor performance that
involve matters outside of routine performance management and makes
91 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Office of Inspector General. Strategic Plan 2018-2022 Update.
(February 28, 2021).
Page 74 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
recommendations that are fair and equitable. OAWP issues reports, makes and tracks
recommendations and other data from internal and external auditing and investigative
functions to understand trends and support advice to the Secretary on matters that
involve accountability.92
VA's Office of General Counsel (OGC)
will continue to oversee VA's Agency
Ethics Program and provide legal review
and advice related to Department leaders
and employees' participation in activities
and organizational operations. OGC also
manages the Accreditation and Discipline
Program and will ensure non-VA entities
seeking to assist Veterans with their
benefits adjudication process meet strict
criterion to protect Veterans and their
families and increase trust in VA.
OGC also ensures timely and fair investigations and adjudication of tort claims regarding
personal injuries to a Veteran alleged to have resulted from VA provided health care and
non-health care related claims involving VA property and employees.
Implementing Strategy 3.2.6: (Constructive Accountability) VA's consistent focus on
the positive aspects of accountability enables collaborative relationships and principled
work environments for employees and VA customers.
Implementing Strategy 3.2.6: (Constructive
VA Principles
Accountability) ensures achievement of two
Trust
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
VA leaders, supervisors and managers work
with employees to establish clear expectations
that encourage initiative, creativity, innovation
and risk-taking to instill confidence and
enhance employee satisfaction. In addition,
leaders, supervisors and managers reliably
follow up to ensure consistent feedback and
support the employee's journey. Employees
learn from their accomplishments and the
ability to learn from mistakes, which increases
their trust in VA and instills a greater sense of
accountability.
92 115th Congress. S.1094, Department of Veterans Affairs Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act
of 2017.
Page 75 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Ultimately, positive accountability fosters safe environments, improves morale and
increases employees' commitment to the mission which will enhance trust in VA among
Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors as well as employees and the
ecosystem of Veteran supporting partners.93
93 Office of Personnel Management. Policy, Data, Oversight: Accountability Can Have Positive Results.
Page 76 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STEWARDSHIP GOAL 4. VA ensures governance, systems,
data and management best practices improve experiences,
satisfaction, accountability and security.
STEWARDSHIP GOAL DESCRIPTION
Goal 4 ensures VA manages resources as strategic assets, to include people,
infrastructure, data and technology and leverages governance, evidence, best practices
and management principles to improve performance and outcomes for Veterans and
other beneficiaries. VA applies a customer-centric approach to all activities, aligning and
measuring activities to ensure they enhance the experience, ease of access and security
for Veterans, other beneficiaries VA employees and partners. This stewardship goal
improves our internal operations and describes the safeguards we will establish to
execute mission related activities. Objective 4.4 addresses gaps identified in the FY
2021-28 Capacity Assessment and ensures VA complies with the Evidence Act.
Goal 4 has four objectives and each one has a distinct focus to ensure we deliver
benefits, care and services that improves outcomes for Veterans, their families,
caregivers, survivors and Service members and use resources effectively, efficiently and
wisely to sustain VA for future generations of Veterans and other beneficiaries:
Objective 4.1 Human Resources.
Objective 4.2 Data Management.
Objective 4.3 Information Technology.
Objective 4.4 Governance and Management Best Practices.
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.1: (Our Employees Are Our Greatest
Asset) VA will transform its human capital management capabilities to
empower a collaborative culture that promotes information sharing,
diversity, equity and inclusion and a competent, high-performing workforce
to best serve Veterans and their families.
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
A transformed human capital (HC) management capability is paramount for VA to serve
Veterans and other beneficiaries and their diverse needs. The Chief Human Capital
Officer advises and assists the Secretary, Assistant Secretary and other VA officials in
carrying out responsibilities for selecting, developing, training and managing a high-
quality, productive workforce in accordance with merit system principles. The VA
Strategic Plan and Human Capital Operating Plan describe actions that will be taken to
strengthen improvements to HC management. Our core values, characteristics and
customer experience principles are at the center of every decision we make. We will
Page 77 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
create a safe workplace, free of harassment, discrimination and retaliation. VA will build a
more inclusive and equitable environment for all employees and those we serve. We will
empower all employees to work together to address challenges, develop solutions and
implement positive change with effective communication and leadership. To do this, our
workforce must be agile and prepared to meet the needs of our mission. Transforming
VA's HC capabilities will empower and enable a diverse, competent, high-performing
workforce that consistently delivers world class services to Veterans and other
beneficiaries.
This capability will be achieved by focusing on the six strategies described in this
objective.
4.1 Lead
4.1 Performance Milestones
Human Resources and
Desired outcomes for employees:
Administration/
VA is among the top agencies and best places to
Operations, Security and
work in Federal government.
Preparedness
Emphasizing diversity, equity and inclusion, VA
(HR&A/OSP),
stimulates an innovative and collaborative work
Management, Planning
environment that results in an enhanced commitment
and Analysis
to serving our customers.
I
take full responsibility to ensure that our employees have everything they
need to carry out the important work before us and that we operate in a
culture that celebrates and draws strength from our country's great diversity.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough94
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 4.1.1: (Employee Engagement and Labor Relations) VA
empowers employees to serve customers efficiently and effectively and to improve trust.
VA Principles
Implementing Strategy 4.1.1: (Employee
Engagement and Labor Relations)
Quality and Service
ensures achievement of three VA
Data/Evidence
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Excellence
Organizations that have the highest level of employee engagement are organizations in
which employees are empowered to use their talents to enhance the customer
experience. VA will be the model employer for the Federal Government by developing a
strong, productive and supportive relationship with our partners in labor. VA will use data-
94 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 78 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
informed approaches to help leaders and employees make VA a place where employees
want to work and where Veterans want to receive care. We will support servant
leadership principles and measure employee workplace experiences through the annual
VA All Employee Survey (AES) and use the data to focus on employee priorities and
recommendations to improve engagement and workforce satisfaction.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.2: (Policy Standardization Drives Equity, Diversity and
Promotes VA Values) VA uses standardized human capital policies and practices to
drive strategic recruitment, hiring and retention while ensuring a sustained, diverse
workforce is in place to support changing needs in a dynamic environment.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.2: (Policy
VA Principles
Standardization Drives Equity, Diversity
Equity, Diversity, Inclusion
and Promotes VA Values) ensures
achievement of three VA Secretary
Quality and Service
Fundamental Principles.
Management
VA will drive timely development and implementation of policies, processes and human
resource (HR) programs across the VA enterprise around all HC functions and
capabilities. VA will ensure key HC policies, directives and handbooks are written and
updated and effectively communicated on a regular basis. VA HC leaders will leverage
standardized policies and practices to support the emerging needs of the workforce and
the customers served, including the analysis, development and expansion of
standardized VA retention practices, tools and standards. Policies will support equity in
recruitment, retention activities, upward mobility and recognition.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.3: (Culture of Learning and Leadership Development)
VA's employee development approach fosters a culture of continuous learning, including
coaching, mentoring and on-the-job learning.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.3: (Culture of
VA Principles
Learning and Leadership Development)
Excellence/Workforce
ensures achievement of three VA
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Management
VA will build a culture that supports continuous learning and professional development in
support of the VA mission. Coaching, mentoring and on-the-job learning will accelerate
employee development and help employees better perform in their jobs. A
comprehensive employee development approach will align organizational growth and
demands with employee needs and career paths. Leadership development programs will
be inclusive, attracting and developing a diverse candidate pool, ensuring that our talent
pipeline for future leaders is comprised of the best and brightest inclusive leaders that
foster a diverse, equitable learning culture. The VA Chief Learning Officer (CLO) will work
with the VA Talent Development Council to ensure that professional development
offerings are appealing to employees and opportunities shared widely across the
Page 79 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Department. VA will offer employees a variety of learning opportunities, to include just-in-
time training and micro-learning in order to support our diverse and changing workforce.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.4: (Workforce Planning and Performance Management)
VA leverages robust planning and defines measurable performance standards to ensure
mission alignment and desired outcomes.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.4: (Workforce
VA Principles
Planning and Performance Management)
ensures achievement of three VA
Excellence
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Management
VA will meet mission requirements through robust workforce and succession planning
and performance standards that are measurable. VA will ensure that supervisors
understand the key role they play in the workforce, succession planning and setting
performance expectations and goals for the employees that they supervise. VA's
performance appraisal processes will enhance accountability, productivity and
performance to recognize high performers.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.5: (Conscious Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Access
and a Safe Workplace) VA cultivates a diverse and inclusive workforce committed to a
safe working environment, eliminating all barriers to Equal Employment Opportunity
(EEO) and promoting conscious equity in VA.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.5: (Conscious
VA Principles
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Access and a
Diversity/Inclusion
Safe Workplace) ensures achievement of
Safe/Harassment Free
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Equal Opportunity
Page 80 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA will embrace the incredible diversity that defines our workforce, our Veteran population
and all of America. We will commit to a renewed focus on equity and inclusion, going
beyond our race and gender, to include the diversity of thought and perspective. We will
empower all employees to perform to their highest potential by eliminating barriers and
biases. VA will communicate effectively and cultivate diverse leadership to promote
inclusion, diversity, equity and access principles. We will execute an EEO program that is
responsive, unbiased and promotes civil treatment of all employees to meet the needs of
our workforce. We will grow our harassment prevention program into a world class
example that includes robust education and ongoing integration into everyday practices.
VA will cultivate an environment where people are physically and psychologically safe.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.6: (Manpower Management) Manpower management
principles integrate standardization and efficiencies into VA business strategy
implementation.
Implementing Strategy 4.1.6: (Manpower
VA Principles
Management) ensures achievement of three
Excellence
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Management
VA will integrate manpower management
principles into VA's business strategies to
drive cultural change, standardization and
efficiencies through utilization of management
tools; manpower planning documents and
reports; organizational design; and defensible
manpower requirement determination analysis
processes. VA manpower tools and related
documentation will ensure repeatable,
accurate and timely information within
resource management and business reference
model information systems to support the free
flow of evidence-based decision making.
Accordingly, the VA's manpower program will inform and integrate with VA's budgetary
and fiscal programming processes. The outcome of manpower management will be the
nexus between organizational design (efficiency), the HR framework and the budget that
will drive a sound requirements-driven process.
Page 81 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.2: (Data is a Strategic Asset) VA will
securely manage data as a strategic asset to improve VA's understanding of
customers and partners, drive evidence-based decision-making and deliver
more effective and efficient solutions.
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
VA will leverage authoritative, high-quality and accessible data to understand critical
problems and develop evidence-based solutions that improves operations and outcomes
for Veterans and other beneficiaries. VA will implement policies and standards to protect
the confidentiality, integrity and accessibility of data. VA and trusted partners collaborate
to leverage data as a force multiplier to understand Veterans and other customers and
anticipate their needs and preferences. Furthermore, data is the foundation for effective
analytics and evidence-based decisions that improve efficiencies, effectiveness,
experiences and the quality of benefits, care, memorialization and services VA and the
ecosystem of partners deliver.
4.2 Co-Leads
4.2 Performance Milestones
OEI, Data
Desired outcomes for use and data management:
Governance
Effective Data Management processes in place.
and Analytics
Information and data are secure and easy to analyze and share
with partners.
Employees/partners have easy access to VA's secure data
sharing tools.
Page 82 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 4.2.1: (Enterprise Tools and Data Management
Instrumentation) VA maintains, collects, curates and provides enterprise access to
quality and trusted authoritative data to accelerate the use of VA data assets via state-of-
the-art interoperable data tools and technologies that capture and report performance
measures to understand outcomes to Veterans and improve the quality of medical care
and programs.
Implementing Strategy 4.2.1: (Enterprise
VA Principles
Tools and Data Management
Instrumentation) ensures achievement of two
Quality and Service
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
Through the Data Governance Council (DGC), VA's enterprise data management tools
support automation and scaling of data management and governance processes. The
future state tools enable and support data security, data traceability and operational and
business analytics. Together, these tools support VA's "curate once" vision to ensure
availability of authoritative data for reuse and enable data sharing across Department
business lines. The Offices of Enterprise Integration and Information Technology serve as
DGC co-chairs. Other DGC members include VBA, VHA, NCA, the Board and the
following Staff Offices: Office the VA Secretary; General Counsel; Inspector General;
Office of Management; Human Resources & Administration; Operations, Security and
Preparedness; Acquisitions, Logistics and Construction; Small & Disadvantaged Business
Utilization and Veterans Experience Office.
VA has a proud history of leadership with data and health informatics; we
have some of the Nation's top data science talent.
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough.95
Implementing Strategy 4.2.2: (Data Analytics and Data Science Workforce
Development) Workforce adoption of innovative statistical tradecraft, predictive and
geospatial analytics, value management principles and evidence-building analytics
improve VA's understanding of trends to project future demand and resource needs and
ensure high-quality and consistent delivery of benefits, care and services.
Implementing Strategy 4.2.2: (Data Analytics
VA Principles
and Data Science Workforce Development)
Quality and Service
ensures achievement of three VA Secretary
Veteran Outcomes
Fundamental Principles.
Excellence/Workforce
95 (McDonough, Denis 2021). Remarks by Secretary Denis R. McDonough.
Page 83 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA's implementation of data science practices and the professionalization of the data
science workforce leads to increased authority, oversight and accountability to improve
data policy, standards and compliance enforceability. VA's efforts to increase peer
reviews and improve the publication requirements for influential information will ensure
integrity and improve quality and transparency into the analytic processes used for
decision making. These processes will lead to the development of standards and
benchmarks which are essential for measuring and evaluating models to ensure they
meet critical objectives for functionality, efficacy and objectivity. The use of data science
tools and artificial intelligence (AI) will ensure VA employees have the correct information
to fulfill our noble mission of delivering the quality health care and benefits Veterans have
earned and deserve.
Implementing Strategy 4.2.3: (Data Framework) Data policies are clearly articulated
and enforced to improve program performance evaluation, ensure evidence-based
decisions and responsible practices whenever Veteran data is accessed or used.
Implementing Strategy 4.2.3: (Data
VA Principles
Framework) ensures achievement of three
Management
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
Data/Evidence
VA will ensure the establishment and implementation of data policies for curation
(identification, retrieval, meta-tagging, standardization, federation, security and access
control, audit) and their application through the development and implementation of the
Veteran Object Model (VOM) and the VA Business Object Model (BOM). The VOM
represents all data and information on the Veteran and the BOM represents the VA's
mission enabling and supporting data and information. Together, the VOM and BOM
comprise the VA Common Information Model placing the Veteran at the center of VA data
and analytics.
This data framework sets the boundary conditions for end-to-end data stewardship
program that aligns with the Foundations for Evidence Based Policy Making Act of 2018,
Geospatial Data Act and Paperwork Reduction Act. It will facilitate interoperability, linking
and dynamic purpose-driven aggregation and the use of automated tools to meet data
stewardship program requirements to effectively manage data, develop an enterprise-
level master inventory of data and provide knowledge management of analytic models
used for intelligence gathering and decision making. These policies ensure accessible,
trusted data at the point of service to improve decision making and Veterans' and other
beneficiaries' experiences with VA and affiliate partners. The implementation of VA's
ethical framework for the ethical sharing of Veterans', other beneficiaries and employees'
data with VA ecosystem partners promotes confidentiality, integrity and trust in VA. 96
96 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Ethics Principles for Access to and Use of Veteran Data.
Page 84 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA leverages technology to augment care for Veterans within VA health care
facilities, in Veterans' homes and anywhere with access to an internet-
connected computer, mobile phone or tablet that Veterans choose to receive
care.
-VA Secretary Denis McDonough97
Implementing Strategy 4.2.4: (Data as a Joint Strategic Asset) VA and DoD partner to
use data as a cross-agency asset to shape policy, enable data driven decisions, create
operational efficiencies and achieve data interoperability that improve experiences and
outcomes.
Implementing Strategy 4.2.4: (Data as a Joint
VA Principles
Strategic Asset) ensures achievement of
Management
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Veteran Outcomes
VA and DoD will develop a common understanding around joint operations and build a
federated approach to data management. The VA/DoD partnership will improve inter-
departmental understanding of moments that matter along the Veterans' journey, or the
Service member's lifecycle and identify data needed to link Service members and their
families to benefits and services earlier in their careers. The integrated VA/DoD model will
enable a seamless Service member/Veteran experience and allow both Departments to
deliberately design an experience that will leverage operational, functional and
experiential data sets.
The data will provide actionable insights and measurable outcomes including increased
access, inclusion, equity and well-being with special emphasis on improving a Service
member's transition from military to civilian life. 98 VA and DoD also will enhance the
exchange of personnel data between Departments to deliver comprehensive benefits and
services and ensure immediate and secure access to reliable and accurate data used in
determining entitlements, verification of benefits and Veterans' status.99
97 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
98 (Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee 2021). VA-DoD
Joint Data and Analytics Strategy Plan of Action (As of July 2021), pp. 4-5.
99 (Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee n.d.). Joint
Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2019-2021, p. 4.
Page 85 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.3: (Easy Access and Secure Systems) VA
will deliver integrated, interoperable, secure and state-of-the-art systems to
ensure convenient and secure access and improve the delivery of benefits,
care and services.
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 4.3 ensures technology and systems enable VA and our ecosystem of partners
to work together to improve Veterans' and other beneficiaries' quality of life and
outcomes. Modern systems and technology serve as another force multiplier that
amplifies our efforts and enables us to achieve our mission. Veterans, other beneficiaries,
VA employees and partners can access applicable data and systems as easily and
securely as possible. This effort requires a commitment to a culture of interoperability that
promotes a consistently positive and seamless Veteran experience with VA by aligning
business, data and information and systems and technology to ensure the right
information and services securely and reliably reach the right person, at the right time, in
the best manner to make timely, informed decisions and enable actions. From a technical
perspective, all systems are designed and operated with interoperability (one-to-many
approach), ease of access and security priorities.
4.3 Co-Lead
4.3 Performance Milestones
Office of
Desired outcomes for information technology and security:
Information
Improve customer satisfaction through systems/shared IT
Technology
services.
(OIT), Chief
Reduce system downtime.
Information
Build and deploy Electronic Health Record Modernization
Officer
(EHRM.)
OIT, Chief
Establish an Integrated Veteran Lifetime Record Indicator.
Information
Improve cybersecurity and privacy protections and resiliency.
Security Officer
Improve the Interoperability Maturity posture for the VA.
Information and data are secure and easy to share with
partners.
Page 86 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 4.3.1: (Cutting-Edge Technology) VA capitalizes on cutting-
edge technology solutions and state-of-the-art cybersecurity tools to optimize the delivery
of care and services to Veterans, reduce costs to the Department and ensure Information
Technology (IT) systems and Veterans' and other beneficiaries' data are accessible,
secure and resilient.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.1: (Cutting-Edge
VA Principles
Technology) ensures achievement of three
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Timely Access
Management
VHA, VBA, NCA and OIT jointly implement the most advanced technology available to
provide digital services through a single, integrated and equitable digital platform on
VA.gov and the VA mobile app. On-demand customer support channels that work best for
customers, including personalized online chat with virtual or live agents100 deliver safe,
secure and quickly accessible services in and out of "brick and mortar" facilities.
Capitalizing on new technology moves developing cutting-edge solutions and connecting
state of the art medical devices to "where the work is" to the teams that provide health
care, benefits and memorial services every day to Veterans and other beneficiaries.
Supporting those teams who know best what their challenges are and how to solve them,
OIT builds and delivers packaged business capabilities linking data, network and systems
with the newest and easiest to use product development platforms.
VA uses business risk and value
metrics to analyze potential
cutting-edge technologies and
inform sound decision making for
replacing legacy systems with
new solutions to achieve a higher
return on investment. These
solutions offer the highest level of
protection and resiliency for VA
data and networks with the fewest
negative impacts to end user
experience, ease of access and
interoperability.
100 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021). 2021-27380. (federalregister.gov).
Page 87 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 4.3.2: (Fusion Teams) Integrated software development,
security and operations teams build, test and release software more efficiently, securely,
expeditiously and reliably for use by Service members, Veterans, their families,
caregivers and survivors, employees and other stakeholders.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.2: (Fusion Teams)
VA Principles
ensures achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Excellence/Workforce
VA engages IT operational disciplines during incremental program planning events and
has them deliver work products during development iterations. DevSecOps brings
customers directly into development processes, fusing them with the technologists
developing their applications. This fusion team approach "shifts to the left" delivery
schedules by "building-in" work and decisions up-front, resulting in faster deployments, a
greater return on investment and greater customer satisfaction.
VA implements new technology and
integrated solutions and incorporates an
agile customer feedback loop to consistently
obtain customers' insights on process and
technology improvements to design systems
that are easy for customers to understand
and use and ensure quality experiences. 101
Development, Security and Operations
(DevSecOps) is a modern, team-level
development approach that avoids wasteful
"queue and review" processes.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.3: (Interoperable Systems) Interoperable systems cross-
populate data and allow authorized users to move between systems and seamlessly
share data/information for consistent and easy access to secure health and benefits data.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.3: (Interoperable
VA Principles
Systems) ensures achievement of two VA
Quality and Service
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Management
Interoperability enables the right information and services to reach the right person
securely and reliably, at the right time, in the best manner to make a timely, informed
decision. Part of the requirement to achieve this is technical interoperability. VA systems
101 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal
Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021).
Page 88 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
require interoperability within VA and between VA and external stakeholders such as DoD
and commercial partners. VA achieves technical interoperability by ensuring alignment
among business, data and system ecosystems. This alignment includes adopting and
maintaining industry standards for data elements as well as for data communications
protocols. Collecting and storing data, (to be shared between systems), using secure
open standards are key to seamlessness at optimal cost, avoiding proprietary lock-in for
storage or formatting. Equally important are creating and maintaining the infrastructure of
services and databases that support interoperability. Commercial applications run "on top"
of the VA's infrastructure to share data and information. VA's underpinning infrastructure is
"the foundation" for technical interoperability inside of VA and between VA and its external
partners.
VA and the General Services Administrator shall collaborate to provide seamless
integration of Login.gov accounts to allow customers to access VA.gov, the VA mobile
application and other customer-facing digital products and eliminate outdated and
duplicate customer sign-in options. 102 The integration of systems allows for shared IT
services that flatten out the architectural framework and minimize sustainment and
maintenance costs. VA considers authoritative enterprise data, business architecture and
integration as part of any modernization or legacy system decommissioning efforts.
III
L'
C
-
#########
##########
#######
the
-
--- -
-
B:
102 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021).
Page 89 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 4.3.4: (Customer Relationship Management) VA's single,
comprehensive, robust Customer Relationship Management system houses standardized
Service member, Veteran and other beneficiary information.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.4: (Customer
VA Principles
Relationship Management) ensures
achievement of two VA Secretary
Management
Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
VA's Customer Relationship Management (CRM) approach integrates multiple systems to
create Veterans' and other beneficiaries' profiles that not only support customers
seamless on-line navigation through VA's digital presence but also provide data for
predictive and descriptive analysis. The CRM allows data revisions in one place to flow to
the other areas of the system to minimize data management burdens on customers and
enable secure information sharing across VA and the network of trusted partners.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.5: (Electronic Health Record) VA's Electronic Health
Record integrates clinical information from VA with the DoD, the U.S. Coast Guard and
participating community care providers allowing clinicians access to a Veteran's full
medical history.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.5: (Electronic
VA Principles
Health Record) ensures achievement of
Quality and Service
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
Management
The VA's Office of Electronic Health Record Modernization (OEHRM) will continue
leading VA's rollout of this new Electronic Health Record (EHR) software, in coordination
with the Federal Electronic Health Record Modernization program office, based on the
same commercial off-the-shelf platform currently being deployed by DoD and U.S. Coast
Guard, until it is in place at all VA facilities nationwide. The OEHRM deployment strategy
divides the VA health care system into similarly sized groups of facilities, known as
waves. Each wave will follow the same deployment processes, with many waves being
implemented concurrently, requiring OEHRM and its contractors to work on site at
multiple facilities simultaneously.
The EHRM deployment strategy will leverage lessons learned from DoD and the previous
VA deployments and will integrate end-user feedback. VA's implementing strategy will
remain flexible and agile while continuing to consider other factors that might require
modifications to the order of facilities that will implement the new EHR solution, while
prioritizing patient safety and communications with the appropriate stakeholders (e.g.,
Veterans, VSOs and oversight bodies).
Page 90 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Our three main transformative projects are the implementation of the
Electronic Health Record Modernization (EHRM) project; the replacement of
VA's multiple, aging systems to manage its inventory and assets and the
adoption of a new financial management system-our Financial Management
Business Transformation (FMBT).
~VA Secretary Denis McDonough103
Implementing Strategy 4.3.6: (Integrated Finance and Acquisition Management
System) VA's financial and acquisition management system is migrating to a commercial
off-the-shelf (COTS) cloud solution, configured for VA to increase efficiencies, streamline
processes, automate controls, strengthen decision-making and integrate financial and
acquisition activities in real-time.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.6: (Integrated
VA Principles
Finance and Acquisition Management
System) ensures achievement of two VA
Quality and Service
Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Management
VA's integrated Finance and Acquisition Management System (iFAMS) is focused on
successfully implementing a modernized, secure, integrated finance and acquisition
system across the entire Department. The Financial Management Business
Transformation (FMBT) program will improve fiscal accountability to American taxpayers
and increase opportunities to improve care and services to those who serve our Veterans
and other beneficiaries.
Implementing Strategy 4.3.7: (Supply Chain System Modernization) VA's agency-
wide modernization of logistics and support services management systems will integrate
supply chain, inventory and procurement data across VA to streamline key functions and
standardize operations across business lines.
Implementing Strategy 4.3. 7: (Supply Chain
VA Principles
System Modernization) ensures achievement
Quality and Service
of two VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Management
VA is modernizing the supply chain system to reduce dependency on current aging
applications across its health care support lines of business by implementing a single,
enterprise-wide solution and decommissioning legacy systems. Core to the modernization
effort, VA is adopting the same government off-the-shelf system deployed throughout
103 (House Committee on Veterans Affairs 2021). Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's First 100 Days.
Page 91 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
DoD. The VA Logistics Redesign program management office is partnering with DoD and
leading an enterprise-wide implementation starting with VA Medical Centers.
The client/server-based solution
provides a centralized, single-point
access to real-time VA Enterprise
data to manage materials/supply
inventories and procurement data
and minimize redundancies. A cloud-
based version will be available as a
shared service from DoD and
migrates all legacy applications into a
single web-based application. In
addition to the supply chain, VA will
modernize other enterprise supply
chain capabilities such as regional
readiness centers and point of use
inventory systems.
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.4: (Evidence Based Decisions) VA will
improve governance, management practices and make evidence-based
decisions to ensure quality outcomes and experiences and efficient use of
resources.
OBJECTIVE DESCRIPTION
Objective 4.4 ensures VA's governance framework, risk management efforts and use of
evidence and program evaluation ensures resources are allocated to drive VA priorities
and improve quality of life for Veterans and other beneficiaries. VA proactively and
continuously looks for opportunities and threats to ensure best outcomes for Veterans
and other beneficiaries, learns from successes and mistakes and uses evidence to make
decisions and drive policy change that improves operations, experiences and outcomes.
VA will leverage knowledge and ensure consistent and equitable access to VA resources
for Veterans and other beneficiaries.
VA's Performance Improvement Officer achieves VA's mission and goals through
strategic planning, measurement, analysis, regular progress assessments and the use of
data to improve results. The Evaluation Officer leads evidence-building and evaluation
activities. The Chief Learning Officer establishes and implements employee learning and
development policies, and the Chief Risk Officer assesses risk challenges and
opportunities that could affect the achievement of VA goals. The Evidence-based Policy
Council and the Investment Review Council allocates resources to achieve VA priorities.
The Office of Asset Enterprise Management oversees VA's Strategic Capital Investment
Page 92 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Planning (SCIP) process and VA real property, fleet and facility assets to maximize
reliability, sustainability, efficiency and effectiveness.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND LEARNING AGENDA ALIGNMENT
One Learning Agenda priority question aligns to an strategy in Objective 4.4.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.6: (Climate Change) complements VBA's question 1b: To
what extent will climate change and the financial risks it introduces affect the Home Loan
Program and what changes would better integrate climate-related financial risks into VA
policies and financial management to mitigate financial risks? Implementing Strategy
4.4.6: (Climate Change) describes VA's efforts to identify vulnerable mission critical
functions to review and revise design and operating standards to improve infrastructure
efficiency, sustainability and resiliency. VBA's Learning Agenda question 1b addresses
climate-induced challenges and the financial risk of climate change on the VA Home Loan
Program.
IMPLEMENTING STRATEGY AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT ALIGNMENT
The Capacity Assessment identified gaps in VA's current ability to perform evidence
building and evaluation activities that must be addressed to not only ensure compliance
with the Evidence Act but also to institutionalize evidence and evaluation across the
Department. Even though many aspects of VA's FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan will drive the
use of evidence building and evaluation activities to improve outcomes for Veterans, their
families, caregivers, survivors and Service members, one stewardship objective and three
strategies are written specifically to address Capability Gaps identified in the Capacity
Assessment. Implementation of Objective 4.4 and Strategies 4.4.7, 4.4.9 and 4.4.10 will
ensure evidence drives effective decision-making that results in improved customer
outcomes, performance and the most efficient and effective use of resources.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation Practitioners) ensures VA
establishes an evaluator job series, provides training to develop a competent workforce
and resolves resource uncertainty (employees) to address three gaps identified in the
Capacity Assessment:
Gap #4. Training.
Gap #5. Evaluation-Related Job Series.
Gap #6. Resource Uncertainty.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.9: (Evidence and Evaluation) ensures VA establishes
guidelines, policies, tools and rigor for evidence building and addresses two gaps
identified in the Capacity Assessment:
Gap #1. Expectations of Evidence/Evaluation Use.
Gap #2. Evidence Environment Complexity.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.10: (Knowledge Management) ensures VA establishes
knowledge management and institutionalizes practices and systems throughout the
Department to address one gap identified in the Capacity Assessment:
Gap #3. Knowledge Management System.
Page 93 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VBA's Capacity Assessment (Addendum B) aligns with strategies 4.4.7
(Evidence/Evaluation Practitioners) and 4.4.9. (Evidence and Evaluation). VBA
identified gaps in the inability to collect the right data and perform statistical analysis that
significantly impedes evidence-building activities. Implementation of VBA's Learning
Agenda, such as the development of outcome metrics for the GI Bill and establishing the
Veterans Affairs Life Insurance Program, will lend themselves to improving evidence and
evaluation activities. VBA established in-house training courses to improve awareness,
statistical analysis and scanning the data environment to support program assessments
and the use of data to drive evidence-based decisions and improve outcomes for
Veterans.
4.4 Lead
4.4 Performance Milestones
OEI, Planning
Desired outcomes for evidence-based decisions:
and
VA uses authoritative data sources to understand and report
Performance
outcomes.
Management
VA procurements reflect the maximum practicable opportunity as
defined by SBA in VA's procurement goals.
Frequency data is used to drive decisions and policy.
STRATEGIES
Implementing Strategy 4.4.1: (Governance and Management) VA matures,
strengthens and integrates Departmental planning, risk, performance, governance and
management best practices to improve performance across the Enterprise.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.1: (Governance
VA Principles
and Management) ensures achievement of
Veteran Outcomes
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Management
Quality and Service
VA's governance, policy and decision-making framework ensures coordination,
accountability and decision rights and thresholds. Change management and knowledge
management principles improve organizational agility, effectiveness, efficiency,
performance and trust in VA. Change management ensures the systemic adoptions of
improved policies, processes, best practices and systems. Knowledge management
improves the creation, retention and dissemination of knowledge to ensure it is
decentralized, discoverable and easy to access, up-to-date and used across VA. HCD
and other innovative methods enhance personal and digital experiences and improve the
delivery of benefits, care and services for Service members, Veterans, their families,
caregivers and survivors. 104
104 (Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government 2021).
Page 94 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 4.4.2: (Learning Organization) VA embodies the disciplines of
a learning organization to enhance the delivery of holistic benefits, care and services that
improve well-being, resiliency, quality of life, financial security and outcomes for our
Service members, Veterans, their family members, caregivers and survivors.
stakeholder
VA Principles
Access to Resources
Implementing Strategy 4.4.2:
Excellence/Workforce
(Learning Organization) ensures
achievement of three VA Secretary
Management
Fundamental Principles.
VA as a learning organization reflects a dynamic cycle of information sharing,
accessibility, feedback and improvement. It requires VA to commit to high-value employee
professional development and establishing and sharing best practices so that the entire
Department - and therefore all Veterans and other beneficiaries whom we serve -
benefit. Employees are the focus of the learning organization, without whom VA services
cannot be provided. This message is captured by the VA Chief Learning Officer's vision
that "engaged and developed VA employees will change the lives of Veterans and their
families for the better."
VA encourages and supports
continuous learning and fosters a
leadership-instilled culture of
learning, where leadership actionably
demonstrates their commitment to
employees' professional
development. VA considers the future
of work and listens to employees to
develop workforce flexibilities (i.e.,
remote work, telework, etc.) that
balance mission requirements with
employees' needs.
Employees have real-time access to knowledge, including access to high-quality,
engaging training content in a variety of formats that considers the learner and adjusts for
their needs and access to data to support and guide best practices across VA. This effort
includes having a Department-wide centralized system of records for training, data and
feedback capture (when appropriate) and governance committees to break down silos of
training and create data-sharing best practices within the Department.
VA Administrations and Staff Offices will be reviewed and rated (where appropriate) on
their commitment to continuous improvement and holistically serving Veterans and other
beneficiaries. Veterans, their family members, caregivers, survivors and Service members
need to feel engaged in the VA system, where their needs and perspectives are captured,
addressed and included in VA's continual cycle of learning and improvement. This effort
may include systematically requested feedback and providing access to relevant and
Page 95 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
high-quality, centralized training materials on topics such as health, benefits and
decedent affairs.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.3: (Requirements Management) VA installs a
Requirements Management Process to prioritize enterprise requirements and optimize
resource allocation to achieve VA outcomes more effectively.
Implementing Strategy 4. 4.3: (Requirements
VA Principles
Management) ensures achievement of three
Veteran Outcomes
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Quality and Service
Management
VA's integrated Requirements Management System (iRMS), an enterprise-wide
requirements management process, will be a key activity supporting the Department's
governance through the Evidence-based Policy Council and the Investment Review
Council. Requirements management is the process of documenting, analyzing, tracing,
prioritizing and agreeing on requirements and then controlling change and communicating
to relevant stakeholders. The iRMS will build upon existing successful requirement-
development systems and fulfillment systems by linking these via enterprise knowledge
management. Together, these three elements-requirement development, fulfillment and
the enterprise knowledge management-will be linked via an information management
system to establish the iRMS.
Furthermore, VA instills tenets of the lifecycle
ITA
discipline to manage risk, deliver benefits,
care and services in a cost effective and
timely manner to drive achievement of VA
priorities that improve outcomes for Service
members, Veterans and other beneficiaries.
The acquisition lifecycle framework
(Conceptualization, Definition, Development,
Delivery and Closeout) will ensure
accountability, fiscal stewardship and
requirements-based decisions that optimize
the use of resources.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.4: (Risk Management) VA will mature and strengthen Risk
Management practices to prepare for emerging threats and capitalize on opportunities to
better meet Veteran needs.
VA Principles
Implementing Strategy 4.4.4: (Risk
Management) ensures achievement of three
Quality/Effectiveness
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Access to Resources
Management
Page 96 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA will leverage enterprise risk management to understand the relative costs, benefits
and consequences of both risks and opportunities and the connections and dependencies
between activities across the Department. VA will use analytical tools to inform and help
leaders visualize the enterprise risk portfolio, respond more rapidly to developing
situations and better forecast potential and emerging threats and opportunities. Critical to
these efforts is a renewed commitment to the quality, rigor and accuracy of risk
assessments and supporting data to ensure a more agile and responsive VA that delivers
timely, quality benefits, care and services to Veterans and other beneficiaries.
Continuous environmental scanning ensures awareness of likely or potential future trends
in global domains such as economics, international relations, technology, environmental
concerns, future of warfighting, health, human capital and other issues of special interest
to Veteran populations. These foresight efforts will ensure VA understands the trends and
forecasts related to the needs of its customers to proactively deliver the benefits, care and
services Veterans, Service members and their eligible beneficiaries earned and need.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.5: (Safe and Secure Environment) VA establishes
standards for physical security and cybersecurity to ensure a secure computing
environment and a safe and secure environment for Veterans, other beneficiaries, VA
employees, contractors and visitors on VA property.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.4: (Risk
VA Principles
Management) ensures achievement of three
Access to Resources
VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Management
Safe/Harassment Free
Keeping pace with Federal initiatives to transform screening processes, VA will ensure
that employees and contractors who access VA facilities and IT systems are vetted,
identity-proofed, trusted and credentialed at the appropriate level to carry out the work
they are assigned. VA also will enhance law enforcement policies and procedures to drive
efficiencies and standardization across the Department, while utilizing Veteran-centric
policing concepts and principles and ensuring environments for care and administration
are safe, secure and free from the threat of physical danger, harassment or property loss.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.6: (Climate Change) VA continues to expand clean energy,
improve efficiency and pursue additional fleet electrification and infrastructure
modernization in response to the climate change crisis.
stakeholder
VA Principles
Access to Resources
Implementing Strategy 4.4.4:
Quality and Service
(Risk Management) ensures achievement of
Management
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Page 97 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Climate change is driving widespread changes to both natural and human systems. To
address climate-induced challenges, VA will continue its effort to identify mission critical
functions at risk with the goal of ensuring sustained operations to support its delivery of
benefits and services to Veterans. In support of Executive Order 14008, Tackling the
Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, 105 VA has re-invigorated climate change discussions
across the Department.
VA will incorporate climate priorities into its infrastructure planning, as well as care and
benefits delivery, with the Office of Asset Enterprise Management's Climate Action
Plan. 106 This plan draws on VA's ongoing efforts and establishes a pathway for expanding
climate adaptation and resilience opportunities Department-wide. As climate risks are
identified, VA will review and revise design and operating standards to improve
infrastructure efficiency, sustainability and resiliency.
Learning Agenda
VBA's question for Impact of Climate Change on VA Home Loan Program: 1b: To what
extent will climate change and the financial risks it introduces affect the Home Loan
Program, and what changes would better integrate climate-related financial risks into VA
policies and financial management to mitigate financial risks?
The Learning Agenda question will enable VBA to identify financial risk to the VA Home
Loan Program and make changes to support climate improvements. Research also will
contribute to VA's understanding of how to adapt for climate change and adjust VA
guaranteed loans to avoid impacting the ability of the secondary market to adopt
Veteran's home loans.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation Practitioners) VA will develop a
competent workforce with the knowledge, skills and abilities to perform evidence building
and evaluation activities to generate knowledge for effective decision making that
efficiently improves outcomes for Veterans.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy 4.4.7:
Staff Shortfalls
(Evidence/Evaluation Practitioners) ensures
achievement of three VA Secretary
Management
Fundamental Principles.
Excellence/Workforce
VA will engage in robust human capital lifecycle planning to align evidence-builder, user,
analyst and evaluator workforce requirements directly with VA's mission. This approach
will include hiring, retention, training and development, appropriate credentialling,
competency assessments, educational requirements, occupational career maps and the
resources needed for practitioners to support all administrative processes. Key
stakeholders, to include OEI, HR&A, manpower, finance and other communities, will
105 (Executive Order 14008. Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad 2021). Executive Office of the
President (January 27, 2021).
106 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Climate Action Plan, August 2021.
Page 98 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
engage as a collaborative team to develop and improve evaluator work activities
throughout VA.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.8: (Agile Facilities and Infrastructure) VA ensures efficient
and effective management of VA capital assets to better support employees and serve
Veterans and their families where they live.
stakeholder
VA Principles
Access to Resources
Implementing Strategy 4.4.8:
Management
(Agile Facilities and Infrastructure) ensures
achievement of three VA Secretary
Veteran Outcomes
Fundamental Principles.
VA's real property management objectives are a critical strategic asset and VA will design
facilities to ensure access to, or information about, the full range of VA benefits, care and
services are available to support all Veterans.
VA incorporates a value management approach to capital investments through its
Strategic Capital Investment Planning (SCIP) process to ensure an agile response to
Veterans' and other beneficiaries changing needs and marketplace volatility. SCIP
identifies current and future mission requirement gaps, focuses the Department on how
capital assets will help meet VA's mission and aligns the resources necessary to meet
critical infrastructure needs. The resulting priorities are based on clearly defined
standards consistent with projected health care workload and current and future health
care practices, considering VA mission delivery requirements.
Through SCIP, VA strives to ensure its owned and leased facilities are modern, right
sized and located to best serve Veterans and other beneficiaries. VA will leverage
existing private sector capabilities and re-balance its facility portfolio to support virtual
care modalities and ensure an agile, flexible and scalable service and benefit delivery
footprint. VA aims to leverage facilities wherever appropriate to provide Veterans and
other beneficiaries better access to care to improve outcomes and quality of life, no
matter where the Veteran is located. 107,
108
In addition, VA will build infrastructure using public/private partnerships and leverage
enhanced-use leasing to allow greater flexibility in managing underutilized real estate
assets to support VA's mission to end Veteran homelessness and the Department's
overall asset management program.
107 M-20-03: Implementation of Agency-wide Real Property Capital Planning. Date Issued November 6,
2019. Details in P-5.
108 M-20-10: Issuance of an Addendum to the National Strategy for the Efficient Use of Real Property. Date
Issued March 6, 2020. Details on P-8.
Page 99 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Implementing Strategy 4.4.9: (Evidence and Evaluation) VA standards, policies and
practices institutionalize expectations for the generation and use of evidence and
evaluation and fully integrate evidence and evaluation activities throughout the
Department.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy 4.4.9:
Veteran Outcomes
(Evidence and Evaluation) ensures
achievement of three VA Secretary
Data/Evidence
Fundamental Principles.
Management
Evidence and evaluation activities will be characterized by equity and independence in
the planning and execution stages of such efforts and practitioners shall be able to
demonstrate those qualities in their efforts, conduct and outcomes. VA will establish clear
guidelines, templates and tools and share preferred practices to generate and select the
appropriate evidence approaches depending on the issue, its timeliness, the required
rigor of the evidence and its availability. Robust efforts shall be made to ensure that the
analytical approaches demonstrate equity in the identification and inclusion of subjects.
Also, the approaches shall be available to assess for validity and the findings subject to
independent verification. Because of such rigor and transparency, decision-makers and
evidence users will have increased confidence in the information they use to guide
strategy, policymaking, operations and resource allocation activities at all mission levels
across VA.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.10: (Knowledge Management) VA's knowledge
management system, policies, standards and practices provide an enterprise-wide
solution to leverage information, insights and research findings for evidence building,
evaluation and effective decision-making.
Capacity
VA Principles
Assessment
Implementing Strategy 4.4.10:
Veteran Outcomes
(Knowledge Management) ensures
Data/Evidence
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Management
VA's Knowledge Management (KM) system and evidence-based approach ensure
transparency and expand evidence building and evaluation activities across the
Department. The KM system addresses the requirements for discovery of potential
knowledge and appropriate capture into repositories with specific relevance, context,
associations and organization, accessible through search and available for use by
practitioners.
One substantive result is the improved use of evidence to make decisions on legislative
proposals, budget requests and, in the future, regulatory issuance and more effective use
of taxpayer funds. Ultimately, KM will support and enable the evolution of data analytics
from stove-piped data without interpretation to data that results in improved
Page 100 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
understanding and knowledge available across the Federal Government and ecosystem
of partners to improve care and services and deliver value that ensures sustainability for
future generations of Veterans and other beneficiaries.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.11: (Benchmarking) VA will be the industry benchmark in
healthcare, information technology, data management, acquisitions, memorialization and
other specialized areas that enable Veterans' and other beneficiaries' resiliency,
outcomes, quality of life and dignity.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.11:
VA Principles
(Benchmarking) ensures achievement of
Quality and Service
three VA Secretary Fundamental Principles.
Veteran Outcomes
Excellence
VA will measure the quality of outcomes to identify deficiencies and use customer
experience and satisfaction scores as performance indicators to improve quality and
experiences and hold employees, medical providers and partners accountable for their
performance.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.12: (High Reliability Organization) VA integrates policies,
practices and principles of a High Reliability Organization (HRO) to ensure a just culture
and equity for Veterans that improves their experience, resiliency, outcomes and quality
of life.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.12: (High
VA Principles
Reliability Organization) ensures
Equity
achievement of three VA Secretary
Fundamental Principles.
Trust
Quality/Effectiveness
VA integrates services to reduce unwarranted variation and deliver 21st Century benefits,
care and services. VA leaders and employees emulate the characteristics of a "Just
Culture" to foster safety and trust by focusing on the delivery of benefits, care and
services and applying systems thinking to identify possible causes of failure. VA leaders
focus first on the why and the how, not the who, when errors occur and create an
environment in which employees feel safe to report harm or near misses with a focus on
continuous process improvement. Leaders must fairly distinguish between conduct
deserving of discipline versus the much more common unintentional human error due to
system and process failures. The journey towards high reliability and a just culture is
continuous and requires organizational and individual commitments to succeed. HRO is
achieved when employees and leaders feel psychologically safe to openly share strong
practices and lessons learned and prevent repeatable errors.
VA modernizes IT systems such as the EHR, financial management and supply chain
systems to streamline processes and enable planning and decision-making that improves
coordination and the delivery of safe, high-quality benefits, care and services from VA or
Page 101 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
trusted partners. VA's efforts will not only improve outcomes for at-risk, underserved and
marginalized Veterans but also improve quality of life for all Veterans and other
beneficiaries we serve.
109
109 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Forum: Translating research into quality health care for Veterans.
(Summer 2020).
Page 102 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
APPENDICES
Appendix A: VA Quadrennial Strategic Planning Process and
Stakeholder Consultations
The FY 2022-28 VA Strategic Plan was developed over a 2-year period using a bottom-
up and top-down approach.
Developing VA's strategic plan was a collaborative effort. More than 150 subject matter
experts from VA's Administrations, Staff Offices, field offices and interagency partners
formed the Quadrennial Strategic Planning Process (QSPP) development team. This
team developed more than 100 trend papers and conducted ten workshops from October
2019 through January 2021.
The QSPP was the framework used to develop the VA Strategic Plan. The framework
consists of six phases. Outputs from each phase become the inputs to the next phase
and are all critical for the overall success of the process. The following figure represents
the calendar year (CY) 2019-22 QSPP.
2019
2020
2021
2022
Alternate
Deliver FY28
Baseline
Draft
Futures/
Gap
Strategic
Strategic
Environmental
Strategic
Analysis
Strategic
Strategic
Options
Goals
Scan
Plan
Plan to
Imperatives
Congress
Bottom-Up Approach
Environmental Scan: The QSPP process began with a baseline environmental scan.
The baseline scan is a process that systematically surveys and interprets relevant data to
identify external opportunities and threats that could influence future decisions. In this
phase, the QSPP Development Team researched trends and drafted short papers to
provide an idea of what the world might loonativek like in 10 to 25 years. VA used the
SKEPTIC Model (Social Demographics, Kompetition/Substitution, Economics/Ecology,
Political, Technology, Industry and Customer/Citizen) to organize research conducted
during this phase. Participants developed more than 100 trend papers and reviewed over
200 other future documents to help identify those things VA must do by 2028 and beyond
to meet the needs of Service members, Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors.
Following the completion of trend paper research, the Strategic Planning Service (SPS)
reviewed the papers and deconstructed them into "factoids." There were two
Environmental Scan Phase Workshops. During the first workshop (January 9, 2020) the
workshop participants familiarized themselves with the "factoids" then arranged them into
Page 103 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
groups of categories. Working in small groups, they discussed the factoids and then drew
conclusions about the relationships among the factoids in each category. Each small
group did this with each category of factoid to provide a crowd sourced group of like
factoids. From this, the small groups identified patterns of "indicators" that provided an
idea of the potential direction VA might need to follow in the future. During the second
workshop (January 30, 2020), participants distilled the high-level indicators and ranked
them using several pair-wise comparison exercises to determine which indicators had the
greatest impacts to VA and Veterans. These indicators became the potential
characteristics of drivers of change that were developed in the next QSPP phase.
Alternate Futures/Strategic Imperatives: Alternate futures, or planning scenarios,
helped us identify strategic implications so that VA might experience in disparate
operating environments. The strategic implications led to the development of strategic
imperatives and their attributes. Strategic Imperative are the characteristics VA must
emulate by 2028 to succeed in our mission regardless of the operating environment.
The first step in this phase was to finalize the strategic drivers of change using the
indicators revealed in the previous workshop. During the February 23, 2020, workshop
the participants examined two indicators at a time and imagined what the future might
look like. This process resulted in three strategic drivers of change.
Drivers of change are multi-dimensional forces expected to significantly cause or
contribute to change; a driver asserts that "this" will cause or affect "that." Drivers of
change describe the essence of what is happening in the environment. The strategic
drivers of change served as the axis lines to develop three potential alternate future
worlds for the year 2035: one optimistic, one pessimistic and one status quo. During the
March 10, 2020, workshop, participants used personas developed by Veteran Experience
Offices (VEOs) to "live" in each of the future worlds. The VEO personas are composite
portraits of real people designed to represent a group of people who currently use, or in
the future might use, VA's products or services. 110 For the workshop, participants
described their persona's needs, expectations and assumptions and the implications for
their persona, VA and Veterans in each world. The results of these descriptions led to
VA's strategic imperatives (see the following discussion). Strategic imperatives describe
the critical characteristics and behaviors that VA must emulate, and the most important
outcomes VA must achieve by 2028; they depict a desired future state and drive the Gap
Analysis and Strategic Options phases of the QSPP. They are the foundation of the VA
Strategic Plan.
110 (Department of Veteran Affairs VA Center for innovation 2014). Voices of Veterans: Introducing
Personas to Better Understand Our Customers.
Page 104 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA 2028 Strategic Imperatives
2028 Strategic Imperatives
Empower Veterans' Independence
Empower and enable Veterans to achieve their lifetime goals.
Ensure a culture of learning, innovation, high performance and accountability.
Integrated care, benefits, and services improve
Veterans' quality of life
Empower teams and leverage strategic partnerships to transform the delivery of
benefits, care, and services to Veterans, their families and caregivers.
Consistency and corporate accountability improve services and outcomes.
Embrace a digital transformation
Leveraged technology drives organizational agility and quality customer
experiences.
Reliable data and quality analysis support and inform decision-making.
Gap Analysis: The Gap Analysis phase helped us develop an understanding of the
current state of VA and used the approved strategic imperatives as the foundation to
develop the desired "to be" or future state of VA. There were two workshops in this phase.
During the April 9, 2020, workshop, participants examined the high-level gaps that
currently impede VA's ability to achieve the strategic imperatives and identified the
differences between the current state (where we are now) and the desired future state
(where we need to be). Workshop participants provided thoughts on how the current gaps
impede VA from achieving the VA strategic imperatives by examing the imperative
attributes using a framework comprised of policies, programs, people and processes. In
the next workshop (June 3, 2020) participants prioritized the draft gap statements
developed in the previous workshop by using a Likert scale to prioritize using three
criteria: impact to Veteran outcomes, impact on trust in VA and impact on VA employees.
The gap statements were reviewed by the Administration and Staff Offices for
concurrence and during the Strategic Options phase, we developed high-level
approaches that would close the gaps identified during the previous phase, articulating
VA's desired outcomes for 2028. This phase defined the desired outcomes for
employees, Veterans and ecosystem partners and answered key questions such as,
"How do we close the strategic gaps?" "What are VA's desired outcomes by 2028 and
what are our options for achieving them?" There were two workshops in this phase
(September 17, 2020, and October 7, 2020). During the workshops, participants used the
VEO persona to analyze the approved strategic gaps at each phase of the Veteran's
Journey Map and then developed options from a specific persona's perspective to
address the needs, wants, struggles and opportunities to improve outcomes for Service
Page 105 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
members, Veterans, their families, cargivers and survivors. The results of the workshop
were then refined and consolidated through multiple reviews, resulting in 23 draft
Strategic Options. Strategic Options were reviewed by the Administrations and Staff
Offices for concurrence and then approved by the VA Operations Board (VAOB).
Strategic Goals/Objectives: During this phase, we used the outputs from the previous
phases and inputs from key internal and external stakeholders to develop VA's draft FY
2028 strategic goals, strategic objectives, strategies and performance goals. There were
two workshops in this phase. During the first workshop (December 17, 2020), participants
discussed characteristics of strategic options and identified the most important, second
most important and third most important characteristics. Then participants moved the
most important identified characteristics to the goal position, the second most important to
the strategic objective position and the third most important to strategy positions on the
exercise template. During the second workshop (January 21, 2021) participants distilled
resulting goal, objective and strategy groupings from the previous workshop into their top
five. They also identified potential performance goals and milestones for success, the
measurable targets to achieve and possible lead coordinating office or co-leads for each
strategic objective. Following completion of the workshop, the SPS team coordinated with
numerous Staff Offices to develop the specific wording for the goals and strategic
objectives and sought specific subject matter experts to develop strategies.
Top-Down Leadership Input
Input from VA senior leadership was provided through concurrence in the Veterans Affairs
Integrated Enterprise Workflow Solution (VIEWS) for the strategic imperatives, capability
gaps, strategic options, goals and objectives as well as the draft and final plan. SPS used
the resulting VIEWS outputs to help develop and modify the Goals, Strategic Objectives
and Strategies that are in the plan. The goals and strategic objectives were also briefed at
several VAOBs and VA Executive Boards (VAEB) for senior leader input and approval.
Stakeholder Consultation
Stakeholder
To develop the plan, we conducted more than 50 interviews with senior
leaders across VA, other Federal agencies that have equities with VA
and Veterans, Veteran Service Organizations (VSOs) and members of
Congress. VA's VSO liaison and Congressional liaison offices assisted
with coordinating the interviews.
The SPS team developed an extensive compendium document that included the
interviewees' responses and an analysis of the results; the team also developed a
summary document to help develop the FY 2022-28 VA Strategic Plan. The interview
participants from other Federal agencies included:
U.S. Department of Defense (DoD).
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
U.S. Department of Labor (DOL).
Page 106 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
National Institute of Health (NIH)/National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH).
U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)/Ginnie Mae
U.S. Department of Education (ED)
U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA)
The SPS team interviewed the following VSO partners Their feedback shaped the
material presented to VA leadership. Several of these groups are focused on supporting
underserved and vulnerable Veterans. This is a key criterion for VA's Learning Agenda
(Appendix D):
Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW).
Disabled American Veterans (DAV).
Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA).
The American Legion.
American Veterans (AMVETS.)
Military Officers Association of America (MOAA).
National Coalition for Homeless Veterans (NCHV.)
Minority Veterans of America (MVA).
Women Veterans Interactive Foundation (WVIF).
Stakeholder consultation interviews informed the development of implementation
strategies across all five objectives in strategic goal 2 and several strategies in objective
4.4.
2.1.1: (Mental Health and Suicide Prevention)
2.1.5: (Special Emphasis Groups)
2.1.8: (Rural Veterans)
2.1.9: (American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans)
2.2.4: (Aging, Frail and End of Life Veterans of All Ages)
2.3.1: (Equity to Marginalized and Underserved Communities)
2.4.2: (Innovation, Emerging Methods)
2.4.4: (Military Environmental Exposure)
2.5.3: (Enhanced Medical Capacity and Capability)
2.5.4: (Emergency Management/Fourth Mission)
4.4.2: (Learning Organization)
4.4.6: (Climate Change)
4.4.8: (Agile Facilities and Infrastructure
We would like to thank all these organizations for their help in making the strategic plan
stronger and more inclusive and for helping VA improve outcomes for Veterans, their
families, caregivers and survivors.
Page 107 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix B: FY 2022-23 Agency Priority Goals
An Agency Priority Goal (APG) is a specific, challenging goal that can be accomplished in
a two-year period, offering a high priority opportunity for improvement. VA identified five
FY 2022-23 APGs to support improvements in near-term outcomes for Veterans, their
families and their caregivers and advance progress on strategic goals and objectives in
the Strategic Plan: Suicide Prevention - Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, Accessibility - Rural
Health Workforce - Expanding Connected Care - Caregiver Support Program.
Suicide Prevention
Goal Statement: VA is meaningfully contributing to whole of government and community-
based efforts to target an overall 10% reduction in Veteran suicide rate from 2019 to
2024, with decreases in the long term of 3% annually by 2028, through enhancement of
programs and training focused on community interventions. To help achieve this, VA will
concentrate on non-VA providers who often lack training on specific suicide reduction
tools for Veterans.
By September 30, 2023, the VA will:
Provide opportunities to Community care network (CCN) providers for training in
suicide risk identification, lethal means safety (LMS) and safety planning. By
September 30, 2023, the Veterans Health Administration will offer trainings to
100% of the CCN providers who are signed-up for VHA communication and take
actions to achieve an increase of 10% in FY23 over FY22 baseline training
completions.
Achieve a 10-fold increase in the number of community providers, including but
beyond the CCN, who have completed lethal means safety training within localized
suicide hotspots identified, using CDC and VA provisional data.
Increase by 100%, gun lock distribution to community-based providers.
APG Alignment FY 2022-28 Strategic Objective:
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.1: (Underserved, Marginalized and At-Risk Veterans) VA
emphasizes the delivery of benefits, care and services to underserved, marginalized and
at-risk Veterans to prevent suicide and homelessness, improve their economic security,
health, resiliency and quality of life and achieve equity.
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, Accessibility
Goal Statement: VA will measure, report and improve the trust of underserved Veterans,
such as women, Veterans of color, and LGBTQ+ Veterans. Through this data and
human-centered design insights, VA will drive improvements to the experiences of
underserved populations served by VA.
By September 30, 2023, Veterans Experience scores related to underserved populations
will increase by 3% over a FY 2022 baseline, with an aspirational goal of 90%.
Page 108 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
APG Alignment FY 2022-28 Strategic Objective:
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.3: (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Accessibility (I-DEA)) VA
will leverage research studies, human-centered design, innovation and partnerships to
enhance understanding of Veteran needs and eliminate disparities and barriers to health,
improve service delivery and opportunities to enhance Veterans' outcomes, experiences
and quality of life.
Rural Health Workforce
Goal Statement: VA will improve rural healthcare workforce staffing levels which impacts
the care VA delivers to rural Veterans including American Indian and Alaska Native
Veterans.
By September 30, 2023, VA will ensure 90% of rural dwelling Veterans are satisfied with
their access to healthcare when and where they need it.
APG Alignment FY 2022-28 Strategic Objective:
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.5: (Value and Sustainability) VA, with community partners,
will deliver integrated care and services, balancing resources to ensure sustainability
while continuing to deliver value and improve health and well-being outcomes of
Veterans.
Expanding Connected Care
Goal Statement: Expanding connected care options for Veterans, VA will leverage
telehealth and digital technologies to enhance the accessibility, capacity, quality, choice
and experience of VA health care for Veterans, their families and their caregivers
anywhere in the United States, including its territories, its possessions, the District of
Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
By September 30, 2023, VA will:
Develop new survey questions to assess Veterans' experience with their access to
VA telehealth services and establish baseline data.
Increase use of TeleUrgent Care, targeted TeleSpecialty Care Services and patient
generated health data by over 5%.
APG Alignment FY 2022-28 Strategic Objectives:
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.5: (Value and Sustainability) VA, with community partners,
will deliver integrated care and services, balancing resources to ensure sustainability
while continuing to deliver value and improve health and well-being outcomes of
Veterans.
STEWARDSHIP OBJECTIVE 4.3: (Easy Access and Secure Systems) VA will deliver
integrated, interoperable, secure and state-of-the-art systems to ensure convenient and
secure access and improve the delivery of benefits, care and services for Veterans,
Service members, their beneficiaries, VA partners, employees and other stakeholders.
Page 109 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Caregiver Support Program
Goal Statement: VA is currently undertaking a broad programmatic review of the
Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) to ensure
it achieves intended outcomes for all new and Legacy Participants and Legacy
Applicants. While this review is underway, VA's Caregiver Support Program
(CSP) will continue to enhance and expand services to Family Caregivers of
Veterans, including increasing access for those not currently served by PCAFC;
expanding access to the Program of General Caregiver Support Services
(PGCSS); and improving the experience of both Veterans and their Family
Caregivers as they access these supports and services.
By September 30, 2023, CSP pledges to focus on the implementation of the following
three outcomes:
Implement Phase Il Expansion of PCAFC which will provide access to Veterans of
all eras and their Family Caregivers.
Increase participation in PGCSS to ensure Family Caregivers of all Veterans
enrolled in VHA have access to supportive services and caregiver resources.
Implement a caregiver survey inclusive of PGCSS and PCAFC participants and
establish a baseline that can be used to inform continual improvement activities.
APG Alignment FY 2022-28 Strategic Objectives:
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.1: (Consistent and Easy to Understand Information) VA
and partners use multiple channels and methods to communicate with Veterans, their
families, caregivers, survivors, Service members and other stakeholders to ensure
information about benefits, care and services is clear and easy to understand and access.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.2: (Lifelong Relationships and Trust) VA listens to
Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors, Service members, employees and other
stakeholders to project future trends, anticipate needs and deliver effective and agile
solutions that improve their outcomes, access and experiences.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2.2: (Tailored Delivery of Benefits, Care and Services
Ensure Equity and Access) VA and partners will tailor the delivery of benefits and
customize whole health care and services for the recipient at each phase of their life
journey, including end of life, to ensure equity and address their unique needs,
preferences, challenges and goals.
VA's FY 2022-23 Agency Priority Goals are published on OMB's performance website.
Page 110 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix C: Strategic Plan Environmental Influences and
Supporting Data
To understand the intricacies of VA's future operating environment, the Office of
Enterprise Integration (OEI) conducted an environmental scan of primary and secondary
research. A diverse group of stakeholders from VA and other Federal agencies examined
a variety of issues related to technology, economics, industry, socio-demographics,
politics, customer experience and competitive advantage to identify trends that may affect
Veterans and VA operations 10, 20 and even 30 years into the future. The research
confirmed that VA operations continue to face a challenging operating environment-one
intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic forced the Nation to
confront the biggest public health challenge in a century, which resulted in major
economic and social disruptions and trends accelerating at an unprecedented rate (i.e.,
digitization, telehealth, managing a distributed workforce, inclusivity and equity-centered
design). The information provided in Appendix C supports our focus on the goals,
objectives and strategies highlighted in the VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan.
External Influences
External influences describe important events or issues occurring outside VA that could
impact operations, such as the financial and budgetary implications of the rising cost of
Veterans benefits, rapid pace of technology and VA's ability to keep up, growing divide
between civilian and military populations and changing demographics of Veterans.
Financial and Budgetary Implications
The U.S. Government's fiscal situation, primarily the size of the Federal deficit and the
percentage of funds that must service our debt, could constrain discretionary spending for
the foreseeable future and limit benefits and services available to Veterans from other
Federal agencies and private sector organizations. After years of expanding growth, VA's
budget could plateau or even shrink as military conflicts become less likely. September
2021 marked the 20-year anniversary of the 9/11 attacks. Many Service members who
spent most of their careers in a deployed, operational or elevated state of readiness will
transition to Veteran status and likely require increased support for service-connected
disabilities, for example.
The global scope and operational tempo of U.S. deployments, the nature of each
successive wartime conflict and the will to engage in conflicts are constantly changing
factors. These factors can contribute to Veterans' high complexity needs such as
traumatic brain injury (TBI), posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), opioid use disorder
(OUD), substance use disorder (SUD), toxic exposures, chronic pain presentations,
polytrauma, moral injury and military sexual trauma (MST). The escalating cost of health
care, education and other benefits and services is a persisting challenge exacerbated by
the continuous evolution of society, for example, the disconnect between military and
civilian experience, an aging population, the cost of multiple modernization efforts and
new/replacement buildings (such as medical facilities to meet the evolving needs of
Veterans).
Page 111 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
The following chart displays the VA budget for FYs 2011-21, highlighting the split between
discretionary and mandatory funding. Since 2017, the budget has increased by $60
billion, or 33%. 111
Appropriations History
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Mandatory
66.4
65.5
74.8
102.4
95.1
92.5
105.5
112.3
110.9
124.7
133.8
Discretionary
56.3
58.5
61.4
63.4
65.1
70.9
74.3
81.6
86.6
92.0
105.0
Medical Collections (MCCF)
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.1
3.2
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.9
3.9
4.5
Total VA
125.5
126.8
139.1
168.9
163.5
166.9
183.3
197.4
201.4
220.6
243.3
Mandatory amounts include $15 billion provided by the Veterans Choice Act in 2014, $2.1 billion in 2017 and $7.3 billion in 2018.
Totals may not add due to rounding.
2021 Discretionary and Mandatory Appropriations and Discretionary Funding Uses
2021 Discetionary/Mandatory Funding
2021 Discretionary Funding
Medical
Benefit
Programs
Programs
Discretionary
87.2%
3.1%
45.0%
Information
Technology
4.5%
Electronic
Health Record
Mandatory
Modernization
55.0%
2.4%
Construction
Other
1.7%
1.1%
Rising Costs of Veteran Benefits
In the past two decades, VA's budget has more than quintupled; in FY 2001, the budget
was roughly $45 billion. For FY 2021, the total was $243 billion. Health Care and
Disability Compensation/Pension, the largest programs, increased by 21% and 47%,
respectively, between FY 2008 and FY 2017. VA Health Care and Disability
Compensation are the two most frequently used programs by our Nation's Veterans. In
FY 2017, these two programs alone accounted for 77% of all VA expenditures ($140
111 (Veterans Administration 2020). Office of Budget.
Page 112 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
billion out of $181 billion). As more post-9/11 Service members become Veterans, these
expenses will continue to escalate.
Approximately 9.8 million Veterans used at least one VA benefit or service in FY 2017.
45% of all VA users received benefits or services from multiple programs.*
VA Benefits Utilization by Program - Veterans only: FY 2017
Health Care
6.1
Compensation
4.8
or Pension
Loan
2.9
Guaranty* *
About 7.3 million Veterans
used at least one benefit
Life Insurance
1.1
provided by the Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA)
Education
0.6
Memorial
0.2
Benefits
Vocational
0.1
Rehab.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Number of Veterans (Millions)
The numbers from the chart do not sum to the total number of VA users. Veterans who used multiple programs are counted in each individual program, but
only once in the overall total.
Contains Veterans who received Special Housing Allowance or Special Adaptive Housing benefits.
Source: U.S. Veterans Eligibility Trends and Statistics, 2017
4
Prepared by the National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics
Civilian to Military Divide
Less than 1% of Americans serve in the military compared to 12% of the population
during World War II. An increasing divide between civilian and military populations and a
potentially emerging "Veteran fatigue" could lead to diminished public and Congressional
support for Veterans' programs. A poll in 2018 found that about 42% of American voters
were either unaware of the continuing conflicts in the Middle East or convinced the War
on Terror was over. An aspect of changing American culture is the increasing divide
between those who have served in the military and those who have not. This civilian-
military divide poses significant and often misunderstood challenges when addressing the
needs and experiences of Veterans after leaving military service. 112
112 (Carter 2017). Center for a New American Security.
Page 113 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Technology
The rapid spread of smartphones, wearable sensors and artificial intelligence (AI) tools
offers new opportunities for scaling access to mental health care. The most promising
technologies available today may reduce gaps in mental health care as well as inform
forthcoming innovations that may transform future care. In addition, new engineering and
technological methods may improve the lives of Veterans with prosthetic systems or to
activate paralyzed nerves, muscles and limbs. 113
Veteran Cohorts by Conflict or War
As the nature of war and conflict evolves, so does the nature of the Veteran population.
There are significant differences between Veteran cohorts that can be attributed to
generational differences as well as the differences in care and benefits offerings by VA
and the community. A quick synopsis of the major characteristics of each Veteran war
cohort follows:
World War II and Korean Conflict Veterans: 16,112,566 Veterans served during
World War Il (December 7, 1941, to December 31, 1946) and another 5,720,000
served during the Korean Conflict (June 25, 1950, to July 27, 1953). They are the
Nation's oldest Veterans, and all are in their nineties or older. In September 2019,
an estimated 389,000 WWII Veterans and 1,165,000 Korean Conflict Veterans
were still living.
Vietnam Veterans: 8,744,000 Veterans served during the Vietnam War (August 5,
1964, to May 27, 1975) and approximately 6,262,000 were living in September
2019. They are age 65 years and older and approximately one-third of Vietnam-era
Veterans are 70% or more disabled.
Pre-9/11 or Gulf War I Veterans: 6,516,030 Veterans (959,554 females) served
during the Pre-9/11 Gulf War era (August 1990 to September 10, 2001).
Approximately 1.1 million Veterans deployed to the Persian Gulf region during this
time and 763,337 Veterans served in theater during Operations Desert Shield,
Desert Storm, or the post-Desert Storm stabilization period (August 1990 to
January 1992). 114
Post-9/11 or Gulf War II Veterans: More than 4.4 million Veterans have served in
the military since October 2001. These Veterans are also known as Global War on
Terrorism (GWOT) and Gulf War II Veterans. They are the youngest war cohort,
more racially diverse than Veterans who served during other eras and more women
(33.2% of women Veterans) served during the post-9/11 era than any other period
(compared to peacetime: 24.9%; pre-9/11: 23.3%; Vietnam: 13.1%; Korea: 3%; and
WWII: 2.5%). Nearly half (48%) of all post-9/11 Veterans deployed to Iraq or
Afghanistan and many deployed to both nations; and because the GWOT is an
113 (Doraiswamy 2019). Empowering 8 Billion Minds: Enabling Better Mental Health for All via the Ethical
Adoption of Technologies.
114 (Honoring the 30th Anniversary of the Gulf War n.d.).
Page 114 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
ongoing conflict, we expect this cohort of Veterans to grow 25% by 2024 to
approximately 5.4 million.
115
Most male Veterans served during the Vietnam Era and most female Veterans served during the Post-
9/11 Gulf War era. WWII and Korean Conflict Veterans are much more likely to use VA benefits and
service than other cohorts.
Age Distribution,
Distribution of Male VA Users by Period of Military Service
Distribution of Female VA Users by Period of Military Service
(in percent)
2017
(in percent)
49.1
32.8
26.5
22.1
14.7
13.7
13.2
7.2
8.8
5.1
4.1
2.6
Utilization Rate,
VA Benefit Utilization Rate for Male Veterans
2017
VA Benefit Utilization Rate for Female Veterans
by Period of Service
by Period of Service
(in percent)
(in percent)
Overall rate: 49.0
83.4
74.1
76.2
Overall rate: 50.3
69.6
60.6
58.5
51.4
44.7
45.6
46.8
30.6
30.9
Source: U.S. Veterans Eligibility Trends and Statistics, 2017
11
Prepared by the National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics
Internal Influences
This section describes VA's fundamental priorities to deliver quality experiences and
customer satisfaction and the potential challenges that may impact VA's ability to improve
outcomes for Veterans, their families, caregivers and survivors. These challenges include
access to benefits, health care, memorialization and services for all Veterans, mental
health and suicide prevention, homelessness, providing value and ensuring inclusion,
diversity, equity and access to VA resources for underserved, marginalized and at-risk
Veterans. VA must understand these challenges and prepare to address them to ensure
Veterans receive the benefits, care and services they earned and deserve.
115 (Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs n.d.). America's Wars.
Page 115 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA Fundamental Principles
In February 2021, the Secretary of VA was sworn into office and identified the four
fundamental principles to improve Veteran outcomes and make VA safe and equitable for
all:
Advocacy: VA will be the Nation's premier advocate for Veterans, their families,
caregivers and survivors.
Access: VA will provide timely access to VA resources. These resources include
home care along with caregiver training and support. This principle also aims to
reduce Veterans' homelessness and suicide.
Outcomes: Veteran outcomes will drive everything we do. This principle aims to
measure the quality and effectiveness of benefits, care and services and Veterans'
experiences and satisfaction.
Excellence: VA will seek excellence in all we do for Veterans. This principle aims to
ensure that every Veteran is afforded access to VA's capacity and resources.
Veterans' Access to Health Care
The health care needs of Veterans differ from the health care needs of non-Veterans.
Many physicians in the United States are acquainted with health care for Veterans offered
through VA, as roughly 70% of current physicians in the United States received some
portion of their medical training in VA health care facilities. However, most health care
providers do not ask patients about their military service and are not aware of resources
available to Veterans and their families. More than half of Veterans in the United States
receive some or all their health care from the private sector, 116 and it is unknown if those
in the private sector have awareness of military culture or if the Veteran population is well-
understood.
Veterans and active-duty Service members are part of a unique culture; it is important for
providers to understand this culture to better serve this population. 117 Understanding the
unique population that VA serves along with understanding the complexities of the VA
system are essential factors to consider when addressing the Secretary's four
fundamental principles. Internal influences reveal important issues that impact VA
operations such as suicide prevention, health equity, Veteran experience, quality and
value of services, maintaining trust in VA and embracing innovative approaches to
improve outcomes.
In accordance with the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, the Creating Options
for Veterans Expedited Recovery (COVER) Commission completed its Congressionally
mandated tasks and provided recommendations to the President of the United States
(POTUS), the U.S. Congress and the Secretary of VA in 2020. The COVER
Commission's charge required far-reaching examinations of treatment models used by
VA to deliver mental health care to Veterans. Comprehensive, evidenced-based reviews
of key treatment modalities, public meetings, site visits to VA facilities and direct
116 (Hunt S.C. 2018). Health Care for Military Veterans.
117 (Burek 2018). Military Culture: Working with Veterans.
Page 116 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
conversations with Veterans contributed to the final COVER Commission Report, which
identified gaps in the coordination of care for high-risk Veterans. VA has many residential
rehabilitation treatment programs (RRTPs) for PTSD, SUDs and homelessness
distributed throughout the enterprise that provide critical care for some of the most
vulnerable Veterans. However, feedback from Veterans and providers revealed that
RRTPs are difficult to access, and Veterans are often referred to community care despite
the availability of RRTP beds in neighboring VA facilities. 118
Value, Quality and Experience
Value-based arrangements are health care payment and delivery models designed to
reward health care professionals for the quality of health care provided rather than the
quantity of services rendered. 119 Value-based programs are part of a quality strategy to
reform how health care is paid for and delivered. According to the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS), value-based programs support better care for individuals,
better health for populations and are lower cost. 120 The value-based care model pays
providers (hospitals, labs, doctors, nurses and others) based on the health outcomes of
their patients and the quality of services rendered. This model differs from the traditional
fee-for-service model where providers are paid for each medical service. While quality
care can be provided under both models, it's the difference in how providers are paid,
combined with the way patient care is managed, that allows for health improvements and
savings.
Team-based care is a core element of value-based care. Teams focus on prevention,
wellness and coordination throughout the care continuum which are especially important
for managing chronic conditions. While not all team members provide direct medical care,
they work together with the patient and caregivers to help identify and address everyone's
health care needs. Patients are the central part of this team. Providers engage patients,
help them solve their own problems and better manage their total health. Open
communication and sharing of information among these teams enhances trust and
engagement and empowers patients to take better care of themselves between visits. 121
Health care today lacks strong evidence on what treatments are effective and evidence
does not always include the degree to which a treatment is effective for Veterans with
complex chronic conditions. 122 Understanding the patient experience is an important step
in moving toward patient-centered care. By looking at the interactions that patients have
with the health care system as a whole and with doctors, nurses and staff, it is possible to
assess the extent to which patients are receiving care that is respectful and responsive to
individual preferences, needs and values.123
VA is undergoing a major reorganization to transform the way it provides services for its
Veterans. This transformation involves legislation such as the VA MISSION Act
118 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). COVER Commission.
119 (Congressional Research Service 2020). Paving the Way for Value-Based Health Care.
120 (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services n.d.). Value-Based Programs.
121 (American Hospital Association 2020). Value Initiative Issue Brief: Team-based Care Creates Value.
122 (Health Services Research & Development n.d.). Advancing Value-Driven Care.
123 (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 2021 (reviewed)). What Is Patient Experience?
Page 117 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
(Maintaining Internal Systems and Strengthening Integrated Outside Networks). The
MISSION Act established the community care program including the coordination of VA
and non-VA care, virtual care (e.g., telemedicine), use of value-based payment models
and enhancing access and quality care for all Veterans with a special focus on
underserved areas. With the implementation of the MISSION Act, Veterans are given
more health care options and additional care is being delivered by the community. The
MISSION Act is driving the evolution of VHA's role as a health care payor in addition to
health care provider for millions of Veterans nationwide.
Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
The Secretary identified suicide as a national health crisis, an epidemic with no single
solution that requires the same drive and unified approach that was unleashed during the
COVID-19 pandemic. He stated that VA's collective engagement of ideas, services,
programs and people needs to be strengthened and unified by a single vision to make
substantial progress and end Veteran suicide. 124 The Secretary articulated that VA will
unify and augment the management of suicide prevention efforts, ensuring and resources
are focused on achieving better outcomes for Veterans and their families, caregivers and
survivors. 125
One-third of Veterans surveyed have experienced suicidal thoughts. Between 2005 and
2016, the suicide rate for Veterans increased 25.9%. In 2016, the suicide rate, adjusted
for age and gender, was 1.5 times greater for Veterans than non-Veterans, with an
average of more than 6,000 Veteran suicides per year. Despite efforts to improve mental
health care for Veterans, this population remains at risk for suicide. On average, 17
Veterans die by suicide every day. 126 Veterans experience mental health and SUDs,
PTSD and TBI at disproportionately higher rates compared to their civilian counterparts.
Successful Veteran reintegration into civilian life rests upon providing Veterans with
training that builds on their military knowledge and skills, finding employment post-
separation from service, preventing homelessness and providing mental health programs
that promote the transition to civilian life. 127 While the treatment of PTSD largely stems
from the mental health system, professionals in other fields also interact with people with
a history of trauma and PTSD. These professionals also may cope with their own issues
around trauma.128 According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA), rauma-informed care includes having a basic understanding
of how trauma affects the life of individuals seeking services.129
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Accessibility (I-DEA)
The Secretary launched a health equity review of all policies regarding care and services
provided to LGBTQ+ and other Veterans and established a 120-day task force to
124 (Veterans Administration 2021).
125 VAntage Point. VA During President Bidens First 100 Days.
126 (VA Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention September 2018).
127 (Olenick 2015). US Veterans and Their Unique Issues: Enhancing Health Care Professional Awareness.
128 (VA Homeless Programs n.d.). Trauma-Informed Care for Working with Homeless Veterans.
129 (VA Health Care n.d.). Trauma Informed Care.
Page 118 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
examine diversity, equity, inclusion and accessibility for women, minority and LGBTQ+
Veterans. This culture and inclusion effort aims at making VA safe and equitable for all.130
Concerns Raised by Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Officials about the
Completeness and Accuracy of VA Race and Ethnicity Data
HISPANIC?
NO
YES
NO
HISPANIC?
=
NO
?
YES
ASIAN
BLACK
?
RACE
VA cannot determine
Missing values in
Conflicting race and
VA cannot ensure
whether race and
race data
ethnicity information
the accuracy of race
ethnicity information in
affect reliability
within a veteran's
and ethnicity
the EHR is self-reported
record makes it
information entered
or based on the
difficult to determine
into the electronic
observation of VA staff
which is accurate
health record
Source: GAO analysis of Department of Veterans Affairs' information I
GAO-20-83
The success of a Veteran's transition is influenced by factors such as their health,
employment, housing and financial stability. These factors are known as the social
determinants of health (SDOH). While VA provides critical and effective care for Veterans,
many SDOH lie beyond the reach of traditional health care systems. Genetic factors and
health care access are not the only determinants of an individual's health outcomes.
Many populations often face barriers to health in their everyday lives. Social and
economic disadvantages such as poverty, lack of educational opportunity, food insecurity
and/or neighborhood crime can result in poor health outcomes and health disparities. 131
It is critical for governments, private businesses, non-profits, community organizations
and health care systems to understand SDOH and address challenges related to housing,
transportation and social services. Through community health assessments and long-
range planning, policy, system, environmental and programmatic changes, SDOH can
improve in communities with the poorest health outcomes. A 2019 U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO) report revealed that Veterans from underserved communities
continued to face barriers to accessing VA health services. 132 Challenges in collecting
SDOH data are related to patients sharing personal information and linked to the training
130
VAntage Point. VA During President Bidens First 100 Days.
131 (Social Determinants of Health n.d.).
132 (Government Accountability Office 2019). VA Health Care.
Page 119 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
and resources required to support those engaging directly with patients in data
collection. 133
Women Veterans
The percentage of female Veterans who used VA benefits increased from 36% in FY
2008 to 50% in FY 2017. The corresponding rate among male Veterans in FY 2008 and
FY 2017 was 39% and 49%, respectively. 134 The ORH is focused on increasing access to
health care for rural women Veterans, which includes telehealth, maternity care,
obstetrics, gynecology and mental health care services for women Veterans. 135
The rate of growth in the number of female Veterans who used VA is over 5 times the rate
of growth of the overall female Veteran population.
Number of Female Veterans Who Used VA Benefits
Number of female Veteran users increased by
FY 2008-2017
51.8% since 2008 while the total number of
1,000
(In Thousands)
female Veterans increased by only 9.8%
Number of female Veterans grew at an average
800
annual rate of 1.0% between FY 2008 and 2017,
while the number who used VA benefits has
grown at an average rate of 4.8%
600
The utilization rate of VA benefits among female
Veterans increased from 36.3% in 2008 to 50.3%
400
in 2017
Female Veterans made up 9.6% of all users in
200
2017, up from 7.0% in 2008
0
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Veterans who Used VA Benefits and Services
by Gender FY 2008-2017
GENDER
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Number of VA Users
8,964,124
8,579,872
8,789,694
8,908,323
9,061,299
9,240,704
9,350,828
9,526,480
9,669,748
9,828,570
Male
8,340,810
7,967,650
8,137,209
8,231,909
8,341,280
8,463,035
8,554,339
8,690,885
8,798,891
8,882,230
Female
623,314
612,222
652,485
676,414
720,019
777,669
796,489
835,595
870,857
946,340
Source: U.S. Veterans Eligibility Trends and Statistics, 2017
7
Prepared by the National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics
133 (Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs TF 2021). VA Establishes 120-day Task Force on
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Access.
134 (Veterans Benefits Administration n.d.). Women Veterans.
135 (Office of Rural Health n.d.). Office of Rural Health Programs.
Page 120 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Veteran Homelessness
There are roughly 37,000 homeless Veterans in the United States. 136 The number of
Veterans experiencing homelessness increased in FY 2020 even before the effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic damaged employment prospects and financial resources for many
communities. For the first time since FY 2010, Veteran homelessness among family
households did not decline in FY 2020. 137 In addition to the complex set of factors
influencing all homelessness (extreme shortage of affordable housing, livable income and
access to health care) many displaced and at-risk Veterans live with the lingering effects
of PTSD and substance abuse, which are compounded by a lack of family and social
support networks. In addition, military occupations and training are not always
transferable to the civilian workforce, placing some Veterans at a disadvantage when
competing for employment. Research indicates that some Veterans have unrealistic
expectations of the transferability of the skills obtained while serving and feel frustrated by
having to "start over" in entry-level positions. 138
Interagency partners have made various program changes in recent years to address
challenges that transitioning Service members face in obtaining and keeping meaningful
employment. The Veterans Employment and Training Service through DOL facilitates
several programs and activities during and after transition that are aimed specifically at
helping Veterans and their spouses obtain meaningful employment.
139
Many Veterans find it challenging to identify support services within their community after
they transitioned. Expanded public-private partnerships can reinvigorate local
organizations, orchestrate efforts to affect real change and help Veterans navigate a
complex bureaucratic landscape. Recent research suggests that Veterans' families
transitioning to civilian life desire program content that includes assistance for family
members and children in the form of information, practical skills, support and parenting
programs. 140 Listening to the voice of the Veteran provides critical input in shaping the
future of transition assistance to ensure that each Veteran has a personal transition
success story. A support network of both family and peers is an important foundation for
navigating the military-to-civiliar transition to ensure a path to whole health and economic
stability for those transitioning to civilian life.
Caregivers
VHA serves more than 9 million enrolled Veterans annually. An estimated 25% of
enrollees report needing the support of a caregiver. For caregivers, the stress of
managing responsibilities, tasks and other needs may take a toll physically, emotionally
and mentally. 141 Section 161 of the MISSION Act required VA, in a phased approach, 142
to expand the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers of eligible
136 (VA Homeless Programs Office 2019). Point-in-Time (PIT) Count.
137 (Department of Housing and Urban Development 2021).
138 (Zogas 2017). Watson Institute of International and Public Affairs.
139 (Department of Labor n.d.). Veterans' Employment & Training Service (VETS).
140 (Castro 2017). The State of the American Veteran.
141 (VA Caregiver Support n.d.).
142 (38 U.S. Code § 1720G - Assistance and support services for caregivers n.d.).
Page 121 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
veterans who incurred or aggravated a serious injury in the line of duty before September
11, 2001.
Veterans' Trust in VA
VEO captures and analyzes the voices of Veterans, their families, caregivers and
survivors through human-centered design research and VA's Veterans Signals (VSignals)
platform. VSignals is a near real-time survey instrument that captures customer sentiment
for service recovery and program improvement. Each quarter VSignals surveys
approximately 257,000 Veterans with recent interactions VA-wide with claims, appeals,
health care, memorials and other services to rate their overall trust in VA. VSignals survey
data for Quarter 2 of FY 2021 showed that 79% of Veterans using VA services trusted
VA, up from 55% in FY 2016 when VA first started surveying Veterans about trust. 143 The
same survey shows that VA's ease of use, effectiveness and its staff's ability to provide
an empathetic experience (emotion) increased as well.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
Updated April 29,2021
Current VA-Wide Trust Score: 79%
1/1/21-3/31/21
Male Veteran Trust 80%
Female Veteran Trust 74%
65% <30
65% 30-39
76% <30
62% 30-39
75% 40-49
82% 50-59
73% 40-49
80% 50-59
88% 60+
84% 60+
Trust by Race and Ethnicity
VA-WIDE EMOTION
*Data from VHA Outpatient Survey
77%
American Indian or Alaskan Native 86%
Asian 92%
VA-WIDE EASE
Black or African American 90%
79%
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander 88%
White 92%
VA-WIDE EFFECTIVENESS
Hispanic or Latino 92%
74%
Not Hispanic or Latino 92%
UNDERSERVED, MARGINALIZED AND AT-RISK VETERANS
Many Veterans, their families and caregivers face profound challenges connected to their
service. In addition to the challenges related to mental health and/or TBI, worldwide
deployments to war zones and/or conflict areas may result in health issues related to
environmental hazards. Moral injury can occur when someone engages in, fails to
prevent, or witnesses acts that conflict with their values or beliefs. Examples of events
that may lead to moral injury include:
143 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2021). Veteran Trust in VA.
Page 122 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Having to make decisions that affect the survival of others or where all options will
lead to a negative outcome.
Doing something that goes against your beliefs (referred to as an act of
commission).
Failing to do something in line with your beliefs (referred to as an act of omission).
Witnessing or learning about such an act.
Experiencing betrayal by trusted others. 144
Morally injurious experiences may lead to feelings of moral distress such as guilt, shame
and anger. Moral injury is a lasting psychological, spiritual, behavioral or social impact
that may result from these experiences.145
MST refers to sexual assault or sexual harassment experienced during military service,
and it can happen to anyone regardless of gender. MST includes any sexual activity that
you are involved with against your will. 146 All of these important areas require an
enhanced understanding of trauma-informed care which includes having a basic
understanding of how trauma affects the life of individuals seeking services.
There are six health registries for Veterans who have had exposure to certain
environmental hazards: Agent Orange, Airborne Hazards and Open Burn Pit, Depleted
Uranium Follow-up, Gulf War, lonizing Radiation and Toxic Embedded Fragments. 147
Compared to their counterparts, a higher percentage of post-9/11 Veterans used
compensation & pension, education, home loan and VR&E benefits. A crucial component
of Veteran wellness and successful transition is mental health and suicide prevention.
Suicide is a serious public health issue that causes unmeasurable pain to communities,
families and individuals nationwide. Engaging community and public-private partners in
the transition ecosystem is important to improve and adapt transition assistance. 148
Special Emphasis Groups
An estimated 1 million lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or queer (LGBTQ+) Veterans
live in the United States, many of whom take advantage of VA's health services. As a
result of stigma, stress and discrimination, LGBTQ+ Veterans face increased health risks
and unique challenges in health care. 149
Over the past 30 years, racial and ethnic minorities have entered the military in increasing
numbers. 150 In 2014, minorities comprised 22.6% of the total Veteran population in the
United States. By 2040, minorities are projected to make up 35.7% of all living Veterans.
VHA serves a Veteran population that is more racially and ethnically diverse and rapidly
144 (Norman n.d.). PTSD: National Center for PTSD.
145 (Griffin 2019). Moral Injury: An Integrative Review.
146 (VA Health Care n.d.). Military Sexual Trauma.
147 (Disabled American Veterans (DAV) n.d.). Military Toxic Exposures.
148 (Veterans Benefits Administration n.d.). The Military to Civilian Transition 2018: A Review of Historical,
Current and Future Trends.
149 (Veterans Benefits Administration n.d.). Lesbian, Gay Bisexual & Transgender (LGBT) Service Members
and Veterans.
150 (Veterans Benefits Administration n.d.). Minority Veterans Program.
Page 123 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
aging. Equitable access to high-quality care for all Veterans is a major tenet of the VA
health care mission. 151
The likelihood of a disabled Veteran to seek treatment from a VA Health Care facility varies with race and ethnicity;
however, rates for Black Veterans are much higher than the average utilization rate of 69.6%.
Service-connected Disabled Veterans Receiving Compensation and
VA Health Care use by Race/Ethnicity: FY 2017
(in percent)
Average VHA
Utilization rate = 69.6
Disabled,
22.6
but did not
32.4
29.1
28.5
37.5
33.5
31.5
use health
care
Disabled &
77.4
67.6
70.9
71.5
66.5
68.5
used health
62.5
care
White
African-
American
Alaskan-
Native
Islander
Other**
Black
of
American
*Hispanic of any race. All other race categories are assumed to
Source: U.S. Veterans Eligibility Trends and Statistics, 2017
be non-Hispanic.
Prepared by the National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics
*Includes Veterans of two or more races.
16
In 2017, there were 158,217 American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) Veterans, of
which 65,749 used at least one VA benefit or service. A higher percentage of AIAN
Veterans have a disability compared with all other Veterans (38.8% versus 30.2%,
respectively). A lower percentage of AIAN Veterans (41.6%) used at least one VA benefit
or service compared to Veterans of all other races (52.7%). AIAN Veterans have played a
vital role in the United States military for over two hundred years. ORH, IHS, Office of
Tribal Government Relations (OTGR) and Office of Community Care (OCC) collaborate to
provide oversight and management of the VHA/Indian Health Service (IHS) Memorandum
of Understanding, which facilitates programs to increase access to care and services for
AIAN Veterans. The VHA/IHS collaboration achieved success in extending telehealth
services from VHA to IHS facilities, increasing VHA providers' cultural awareness and
151 (Office of Health Equity n.d.). Social Determinants Fact Sheet v2.
Page 124 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
expanding the electronic Health Information Exchange for Native Veteran care
coordination.
152
In April 2021, VA conducted tribal consultation focused on updating the 2011 agency
tribal consultation policy and has been providing OMB with regular updates regarding
revisions to the policy along with an agency tribal consultation plan. In October 2021, the
VA Advisory Committee on Tribal and Indian Affairs was formally established and
convened its first meeting in January 2022. The Committee has, by statute, responsibility
for supporting the agency in its tribal consultation efforts and will be providing input into
the final proposed revisions to the agency policy. VA anticipates that the final draft,
including input from tribal leaders and the Committee, will be published in the Federal
Register late summer of 2022.
Military to Civilian Transition and Reintegration
Approximately 75% of Service members who separated in 2017 were between the ages
of 17 and 34. In 2018, VA revised its Transition Assistance Program (TAP) curriculum to
better meet the needs of this younger, more diverse population. Approximately 75% of
post-9/11 Veterans are under age 45.
When Service members transition to civilian life and become Veterans, the transition and
reintegration process is often rife with challenges. Some leave the military with service-
related disabilities such as PTSD, TBI or depression that further complicates the
reintegration to civilian life.
The stigmatization of such unseen disabilities can make transition even more challenging
for many Veterans which increases the need for proactive support to transitioning Service
members at-risk for suicide, homelessness, unemployment and economic insecurity.
Transitional stress is the heightened amount of stress that Service members experience
when they leave active duty for civilian life. Symptoms of transitional stress may include
fear and worry about adjusting to a new routine and lifestyle, connecting with family and
friends and finding employment. Transitional stress occurs in the initial period when the
Service member returns home, whereas mental health disorders such as PTSD,
depression and anxiety persist after the initial transition period and may include more
severe symptoms. However, the symptoms of transitional stress and these mental health
disorders can overlap and be difficult to separate; therefore, transitional stress is often
misdiagnosed.
153
152
(National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics n.d.). American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans:
2017.
153 (Mobbs 2018). Beyond War and PTSD: The crucial role of transition stress in the lives of military
Veterans.
Page 125 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
TRANSITION DRIVERS
STAKEHOLDERS
TRANSITIONING SERVICE
MEMBERS, VETERANS,
FAMILIES, CAREGIVERS,
AND SURVIVORS
STATE AND LOCAL
Figure 11. The transition ecosystem delivers holistic benefits, care and services to Service members and
their families at critical stages of their life journey. 154
Rural Veterans
Almost a quarter of all Veterans in the United States (4.7 million), return from military
careers to reside in rural communities. While Veterans may enjoy the benefits of rural
living, they also may experience rural health care challenges that are intensified by
combat-related injuries and illnesses. Rural Veterans enrolled in VA's health care system
are significantly older than non-rural Veterans: 55% are over the age of 65. This older
Veteran population is more likely to suffer from diabetes, obesity, high blood pressure and
heart conditions that require more frequent, ongoing and costly care. The younger
generation of rural Veterans also experiences multiple medical and combat-related
issues, which will require significant on-going access to care. More than 301,000 rural
Veterans served in Iraq and Afghanistan. In rural areas, basic levels of health care or
preventive care may not be available to support long-term health and well-being.
154 (Veterans Benefits Administration n.d.). The Military to Civilian Transition 2018: A Review of Historical,
Current and Future Trends.
Page 126 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Leveraging partnerships with qualified health centers, critical access hospitals, rural
health centers, Tribal health centers and IHS are essential elements of health care
delivery in rural communities. 155
Expanding telehealth is also an essential element, but rural areas are often challenged
with limited broadband capacity. ORH continues to work with Federal agencies in the
Broadband Interagency Working Group to improve coordination across programs, reduce
regulatory barriers to broadband deployment and promote awareness of the importance
of Federal support for broadband investments. Working alongside agencies like the DOL,
DOC and DOT, ORH works to expand rural broadband access and empower telehealth
solutions that connect rural Veterans with needed care. 156
Aging, Frail and End of Life Veterans of All Ages
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the U.S. population aged 65 years or older is
expected to nearly double over the next 30 years, reaching an estimated 83.7 million by
2050. VA projects the number of VHA enrollees of all ages to decrease slightly,
approximately 8%, between FY 2019 and FY 2039, but the number of enrollees aged 85
and older is projected to increase by approximately 38% and women Veteran enrollees
aged 85 and older will increase by over 200%. 157, 158,
159
As Veterans age, VA will provide benefits and services that address a variety of issues
including the changing health risks they face, as well as financial challenges through VA
benefits and health services. In 2021, VA joined the National Age-Friendly Health
Systems Initiative and Committed to Care Excellence for Older Adults.
Becoming an Age-Friendly Health System involves providing four evidence-based
elements of high-quality care to all older adults in a health care system. Known as the
"4Ms," VA delivers what Matters, Medication, Mentation and Mobility.
Growth in the aging population has left health care systems behind as they struggle to
establish an Age-Friendly Health System and provide reliable evidence-based care to
every older adult at every care interaction. Age-Friendly Health Systems follow an
essential set of evidence-based practices, cause no harm and align with the 4Ms to
deliver what matters most to older Veterans and their family caregivers. Many VA health
systems are on the list of Age-Friendly Health Systems and others are working on
implementing the 4Ms to be recognized as Age-Friendly Health Systems 160, 161
155
(VA Office of Rural Health n.d.). Office of Rural Health.
156 (Office of Rural Health n.d.). Office of Rural Health Programs.
157 (H. S. Kaye 2012). Gradual Rebalancing of Medicaid Long-Term Services and Supports Saves Money
and Serves More People, Statistical Model Shows. Health Affairs, pp. 1195-2003; Medicaid Long Term
Services and Supports Annual Expenditures Report: Federal Fiscal Years 2017 and 2018. Mathematica
Policy Research.
158 (Institute of Medicine 2008). Retooling for an Aging America: Building the Health Care Workforce. The
National Academies Press.
159 (U.S. Government Accountability Office February 2020). VA Health Care: Veteran's Use of Long-Term
Care is Increasing and VA Faces Challenges in Meeting the Demand. GAO-20-284.
160 (Tinetti n.d.). What Is an Age-Friendly Health System?
161 (VHA Geriatrics and Extended Care n.d.). VA Age-Friendly Health Systems Initiative.
Page 127 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Figure 1. 4Ms Framework of an Age-Friendly Health System
What
What Matters
Matters
Know and align care with each older adult's
specific health outcome goals and care
preferences including, but not limited to,
end-of-life care, and across settings of care.
Medication
Mobility
Medication
4Ms
If medication is necessary, use Age-Friendly
medication that does not interfere with What
Framework
Matters to the older adult, Mobility, or
Mentation across settings of care.
Mentation
Prevent, identify, treat, and manage
Mentation
dementia, depression, and delirium across
settings of care.
Mobility
Age-Friendly
Ensure that older adults move safely every
Health Systems
day in order to maintain function and do
What Matters.
An initiative of The John A. Hartford Foundation and the Institute for Healthcare
Improvement (IHI) in partnership with the American Hospital Association (AHA)
and the Catholic Health Association of the United States (CHA).
Aging in Place is an initiative to increase access and availability to Home & Community
Based Services (HCBS) to allow Veterans to live at home or the least restrictive
environment possible. The delay of prevention of nursing home care with the use of
HCBS services has provided significant long-term savings in many state Medicaid
programs since the costs of nursing home care are significantly higher than HCBS
services. 162
The VHA GEC covers care for not only aging Veterans but also provides home care, end
of life care and long-term care for Veterans of all ages in all care settings. VCP is a
national initiative to ensure all Veterans and their caregivers have access to the widest
range of choices and services. VCP is a joint project of VHA's Offices of Geriatrics and
Extended Care, Community Engagement, Rural Health, Mental Health, Voluntary
Services and Caregiver Support.
VCPs are coalitions of Veterans and their caregivers, VA facilities, community health
providers, organizations and agencies that provide seamless access and transitions
among the full continuum of care and support services throughout VA and the community.
Of 19 million Veterans, 9 million are enrolled in VA health care, 47% of enrolled Veterans
are over age 65 and 70% of Veterans receive additional health care from non-VA
162 (Felix HC 2011), (Irvin 2017), (Marek K. D. 2012) (Newcomer 2016), (H. S. Kaye 2009), (H. S. Kaye
2012), (Murray 2021).
Page 128 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
sources. VCP provides an innovative, flexible, relevant and useful approach that assists a
VA facility to establish and nurture community partnerships that facilitates access to and
coordination of the broad spectrum of health care needs of all Veterans and their
families. 163
Pain Management and Addiction
On July 22, 2016, President Obama signed into law the Comprehensive Addiction and
Recovery Act of 2016 (P.L. 114-198) 164 This is the first major Federal addiction legislation
in 40 years and the most comprehensive effort undertaken to address the opioid
epidemic, encompassing all six pillars necessary for such a coordinated response:
prevention, treatment, recovery, law enforcement, criminal justice reform and overdose
reversal. 165
VHA's Whole Health System transformation expanded complementary and integrative
health (CIH) therapies as part of standard medical care. This expansion is being driven by
several factors, including mounting evidence of the effectiveness of these therapies for
many conditions, increasing demand from Veterans, increasing need to offer non-
pharmacologic pain management strategies to counter the opioid epidemic and significant
support from Congress and VA leadership. However, continued expansion of CIH
therapies require more resources to provide optimal access to meet demand and
improved integration. 166 According to the Whole Health System of Care Evaluation-A
Progress Report on Outcomes of the Pilot at 18 Flagship Sites-26% of Veterans with
chronic pain used complementary and integrative health (CIH) services. There was a
threefold reduction in opioid use, from 38% to 11%, among Veterans with chronic pain
who used whole health services compared to those who did not. 167 In 2017, 67.8% of
drug overdoses were with prescription opioids. The rate of OUD among VHA patients is
seven times higher than that of non-VHA enrollees. 168
Adding to the complexity of treating pain in Veterans are increasing numbers of Veterans
struggling with behavioral and mental health issues related to PTSD and TBI. 169 These
conditions are strongly associated with SUDs, as are other problems experienced by
returning military personnel, including reintegration stresses, sleep disturbances and
violence in relationships.170 Onset of SUDs also can emerge secondary to other mental
health problems associated with these stressors, such as PTSD and depression. 171
163 (National Center for Healthcare Advancement and Partnerships n.d.) Veteran Community Partnerships.
164
(U.S. Congress 2016). S.524, Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016.
165 (Congressional Research Service 2016). The Congressional Appropriations Process.
166 (Office of Health Equity n.d.).
167 (Bokhour 2021) B.G., Hyde JK, Zeliadt S, Mohr DC. Whole Health System of Care Evaluation- A
Progress Report on Outcomes of the WHS Pilot at 18 Flagship Sites. 2020. Veterans Health Administration,
Center for Evaluating Patient-Centered Care in VA (EPCC-VA).
168 (Zaccheus 2020). Drug Overdose and Suicide Among Veteran Enrollees in the VHA: Comparison
Among Local, Regional and National Data.
169 (Seal 2017). Association of Traumatic Brain Injury with Chronic Pain in Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans:
Effect of Comorbid Mental Health Conditions.
170 (NIDA 2019). Substance Use and Military Life Drug Facts.
171 (Teeters 2017). Substance use Disorders in Military Veterans: Prevalence and Treatment Challenges.
Page 129 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Health Care System researchers found that opioids were not superior to non-opioids for
improving pain related function over 12 months. In fact, non-opioid medications were
more effective than opioids for reducing pain intensity. The results do not support starting
opioid therapy for moderate to severe chronic back pain, hip or knee osteoarthritis pain.
The study found no advantages of opioids that would outweigh their risk of serious
harm. 172
Substance Abuse
Service members transitioning from active duty to civilian life are at high risk of substance
abuse. Some Veterans may turn to alcohol and drug use as unhealthy ways of coping
with trauma, anxiety, depression, pain, injuries and other conditions related to their
service. Research has found that 46% of Veterans reported alcohol or substance abuse
during active duty and 42% reported alcohol or drug use after transitioning to civilian
life. 173 Since 2017, a number of initiatives have been spearheaded by VA and Veterans
groups to stem the tide of the opioid crisis among Veterans, including new comprehensive
prescription guidelines and exploring alternatives to using opioids for pain
management. 174, 175 Mindfulness and meditation are a holistic, alternative approach to
positively impact pain centers and reduce stress. 176
An analysis of health insurance claims data published in the online journal BMJ Open
revealed "diseases of despair" such as substance abuse, alcohol dependency and
suicidal thoughts, such behaviors have soared in the United States over the past decade.
Between 2015 and 2017, life expectancy fell in the United States, the longest sustained
decline since 1915-18. Deaths among middle-aged white non-Hispanic men and women
rose sharply between 1999 and 2015. These premature deaths are largely attributable to
accidental overdose, alcohol-related disease and suicide. 177 Despair consists of cognitive,
emotional, behavioral and biological domains. Despair also can permeate social
relationships, networks, institutions and communities. 178
Justice-Involved Veterans
Many Veterans return home from deployments with PTSD or other mental health issues.
They may feel isolated, lonely or misunderstood. Separated from the military "family" with
whom they served, they carry the burden of their service alone and some struggle with
172 (Krebs 2018). Effect of Opioid vs Nonopioid Medications on Pain-Related Function in Patients with
Chronic Back Pain or Hip or Knee Osteoarthritis Pain: The SPACE Randomized Clinical Trial.
173 (Derefinko 2018). Substance Use and Psychological Distress Before and After the Military to Civilian
Transition.
174 (Department of Veterans Affairs n.d.). Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI).
175 (Veterans Health Administration n.d.). Management of Opioid Therapy (OT) for Chronic Pain.
176 (Herman, Cost-effectiveness of Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction Versus Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy or Usual Care Among Adults With Chronic Low Back Pain 2017).
177 (Brignone 2020). Trends in the Diagnosis of Diseases of Despair.
178 (Shanahan 2019). Does Despair Really Kill? A Roadmap for an Evidence-Based Answer.
Page 130 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
how to cope with their feelings. Some self-medicate or act out to ease their pain and some
find themselves involved in the criminal justice system- 179,
180
Veteran Intercepts in the Criminal Justice System
Sample Decision Points
Initial
Crisis Lines
Jail
Detention
Reentry
Crisis Care
First Court
Prison
Continuum
Appearance
Reentry
Reentry
&
INTERCEPT
INTERCEPT
INTERCEPT
0
2
4
Opportunities for Diversion and Inclusion at the Lowest Level possible
INTERCEPT
INTERCEPT
INTERCEPT
3
5
The National Institute of
Jails/Courts
community
Corrections worked
collaboratively with the
Substance Abuse and Mental
Diversion
Health Services Administration
Crisis Care
and the US Department of
Continuum
Veterans Affairs to adapt the
Pretrial
sequential intercept model for
Parole
the justice-involved veterans
Release
population.
Crisis
Cite &
Detained
Each decision point in the
Pretrial
criminal justice system
Teams
Release
Probation
represents an opportunity to
divert and intervene at the
lowest level possible and to
Specialty
minimize the collateral
Courts
consequences for a veteran
Arrest &
getting more deeply involved
Booking
in the justice system.
Dispositional Court
179 (Department of Justice 2019). Law Enforcement Officers.
180
Incarceration can affect a Veteran's eligibility for certain VA benefits or the amount. Additional
information on VA benefits and programs for justice-involved Veterans is available at VA's website.
Page 131 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix D. FY 2022-28 Learning Agenda
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
FY 2022-28 Learning Agenda
Page 132 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Background and Approach
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking (EBP) Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-435,
"Evidence Act") requires cabinet-level agencies including the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) to create and use Learning Agendas, Annual Evaluation Plans and Capacity
Assessments. In guidance documents, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
specified requirements for these deliverables.
The Learning Agenda and the Capacity Assessment accompany VA's FY 2022-28
Strategic Plan, per statute and OMB guidance. These two documents are appendices in
the Strategic Plan.
Since the Evidence Act became law in early 2019, the chartered VA Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Working Group (FEBPWG) has superintended efforts to
meet the statutory requirements of the Evidence Act across VA. The FEBPWG has over
190 representatives from the three VA Administrations (Veterans Benefits Administration
(VBA), Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and the National Cemetery Administration
(NCA)) and Staff Offices supporting implementation of the Evidence Act and EBP
principles more generally. Organizations with expertise in evidence-building and
evaluation, such as VHA's Office of Research and Development (ORD) and its Quality
Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), provide critical support to the FEBPWG and
assist other work group member organizations to expand and mature capabilities across
the Department. In turn, the FEBPWG works to advocate on behalf of Veterans issues by
featuring ORD/QUERI's studies in public-facing documents like this Learning Agenda and
to assist in coordinating efforts across VA offices. (See VA's Capacity Assessment for
additional detail regarding VHA's efforts in evidence-building and -use.)
Formal sessions occur monthly with overran average of 50 attendees and members meet
informally in groups several times a week to advance EBP efforts across the enterprise.
In addition to the statutorily required deliverables, the FEBPWG has spearheaded the
development, implementation and successful use of formal, documented evidence-based
best practices (such as strength-of-evidence checklists for use by non-expert program
offices) for legislative proposals and budget formulation.
This is VA's first standalone learning agenda document (although VHA for many years
has used research agendas as evidence-building plans for its health care studies) and it
summarizes the Department's efforts to obtain evidence-based input and insights with
findings across the Administrations and the entire enterprise. This Learning Agenda
represents the views of self-identified practitioners of data analysis/science and program
evaluations.
Topic Selection Criteria
Since the passage of the Evidence Act, VA viewed the opportunity of publicizing its most
significant evaluation and research priorities as consistent with its vital mission on behalf
of Veterans and their families and welcomes the chance to further advocate for them by
focusing attention on important issues.
Page 133 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
To maximize the value of implementing the Evidence Act provisions on behalf of Veterans
and their families, the VA FEBPWG identified several criteria to determine issues
appropriate for the Learning Agenda.
Criterion #1: Existing Lines of Inquiry
VA's current efforts entail hundreds of program evaluations every year, conducted with a
variety of means and for many reasons, including statutory requirements. In addition,
VHA conducts hundreds of focused evaluations of clinical practices. For the purposes of
the Evidence Act, however, this Learning Agenda and associated Annual Evaluation
Plans focus on evaluations of policies and programs as defined by OMB guidance in M-
20-12. Evaluation practitioners, both in offices focused on research and in program offices
responsible for program implementation, focus on existing lines of inquiry embodied in
current programs and efforts. Practitioners believe that all areas of national importance
currently are being addressed at some point in the evaluation lifecycle.
Moreover, VA seeks to leverage its existing, robust approaches to outreach and in reach
about potential studies, data and findings with its many stakeholders, including peer
experts within the Federal government (i.e., DoD, HHS and HUD), intergovernmental
authorities, the private sector, VSOs and other advocacy and research-based
organizations, including the National Academies. VA's Capacity Assessment documents,
for example, VHA's existing lifecycle for investigations that maximize diverse inputs as to
study topic priorities from across the VA enterprise and elsewhere and which result in
effective dissemination of findings. Specific such requirements in the Evidence Act reflect
VA's thought-leading approach which has developed over decades.
This initial criterion also highlights areas and topics of on-going interest and concern for
which important questions remain to be addressed. Such topics present gaps in
knowledge, processes and practices for which the Learning Agenda will focus attention
within the VA enterprise, with stakeholders, Veterans and the public.
VA evidence-builders, researchers, evaluators and statisticians look forward to using the
dissemination of this Learning Agenda to its many partners to deepen data sharing and
topic identification activities documented in VA's Annual Evaluation Plan.
Criterion #2: Mission-focus on Veterans and their Families
VA faces several challenges with respect to our direct mission-driven care and services,
as well as our administrative functions. However, VA chooses to focus the initial effort
under the Evidence Act on purely Veteran-facing topics. By doing so, efforts to address
the requirements of the Evidence Act will stimulate internal VA interest and external
stakeholder attention, on the most important issues facing Veterans and their families. In
future cycles, VA may choose to expand its focus to include administrative matters such
as hiring, placement of facilities, or improving the efficiency of supply chains.
This Veteran-facing aspect requires VA to highlight important gaps regarding vital issues
for Veterans, such as suicide, homelessness and opioid addiction - areas in which VA
and the rest of government have made substantial progress. However, more needs to be
done, but such action requires knowledge that has yet to be uncovered and confirmed.
Page 134 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA's Learning Agenda therefore focuses on critical gaps in understanding of critical
issues for Veterans and their families.
As is further discussed in the FY 2023 VA Annual Evaluation Plan, evidence-builders and
evaluators are frequently embedded in the same offices which are responsible for
program execution. This characteristic helps to ensure that research priorities are rapidly
identified and acted upon, and the findings can be used quickly to adjust practices,
processes and policies to best serve Veterans. Also, in this way program offices can
rapidly share results with their program and policy collaborators both within VA and
elsewhere. This aspect is vitally important to effectively address urgent issues such as
suicide prevention, opioid use disorder and homelessness. Those investigations
necessary to serve oversight purposes, however, are conducted with greater
independence, often by evaluators in different chains of command.
Criterion #3: Underserved and Vulnerable Veterans
Third, VA's Strategic Plan for FY 2022-28 encompasses myriad areas in which VA
impacts Veterans-every aspect of the life journeys of our Veterans-requiring a focus on
a meaningful subset of our strategic objectives. An immediate consensus emerged in the
FEBPWG and across VA: To rally attention and effort to VA's public evaluation activities
under the Evidence Act we must focus on the most compelling of our objectives which are
enhancing care and services for underserved, vulnerable, at-risk and marginalized
Veterans (e.g., those facing addiction, suicide or homelessness. In early deliberations,
there was no second-place issue that presented so stark a priority.
Criterion #4: Nomination Using Administration's Existing Prioritization
The FEBPWG decided that those individuals who were responsible for carrying out
agendas and plans should use their existing, documented priorities (which align to VA's
Strategic Plan) to nominate a set of questions and research topics for which critical gaps
in knowledge exist. These gaps have been previously identified by VHA and VBA, as they
note in the FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan. For the purposes of developing this Learning
Agenda, the Administrations applied their own criteria and these criteria to prioritize them
for inclusion.
Each Administration has its own strategy and business documents that link to the VA
strategic plan, and they are familiar with the most significant issues they face that address
the criteria. VHA enters the Evidence Act process already recognized as a thought leader
in program evaluation and implementation sciences, while VBA begins with a substantial
process-analytic foundation but not one focused heretofore on evaluation. Elsewhere in
VA there are important pockets of strength in statistics and evidence-building, but there is
currently no centralized focus on consistent standards and processes for their work.
Therefore, the most coherent proposals for Learning Agenda topics are from VA's two
major administrations which, although they are at different maturity levels in evaluation
sciences, are the foci for impactful efforts.
This federated approach ensures that policymakers can obtain the most salient findings
addressing the most significant issues they are likely to face, while the Administrations
pursue questions, they can address in the timeframe of this Learning Agenda and the
associated Annual Evaluation Plans using the current and likely state of knowledge,
Page 135 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
expertise and analytic capacity they encompass. VA seeks to ensure that findings from
specific evidence-building efforts are available to policymakers as soon as they are
available to effectively inform decisions, rather than waiting for more evidence to become
certain. The federated approach across VA organizations and across evaluations and
other evidence-building efforts provides multiple channels for findings to inform decisions.
For example, VHA's long-range plan goals are aligned with overall VA goals for
improvement and modernization of Veteran health services and strengthening VHA as a
high-reliability organization:
Make VHA the provider and care coordinator of choice for Veterans;
Deliver comprehensive and integrated whole health care;
Innovate as a learning and teaching organization; and
Increase the effective and efficient use of resources across the enterprise.
Learning Agenda Topics
This Learning Agenda presents VA's specific approaches to identify priority Learning
Agenda business or policy questions. Using the term "business" implies that evidence-
builders and evaluators are to address not only strictly policy questions-"what" VA
should be doing-but also administrative and process issues the resolution of which may
be essential to making decisions about policy and management issues-"how" VA is
doing business. During FEBPWG's deliberations, VA prioritized evidence-building to
address VA's FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan, Strategic Goal 2: "VA delivers timely,
accessible, high-quality benefits, care and services to meet the unique needs of Veterans
and all eligible beneficiaries," with an emphasis on underserved, vulnerable, at-risk and
marginalized Veterans. VA's Learning Agenda questions derive directly from this priority.
The Administrations were asked to identify the significant business or policy questions
related to such Veterans whose evidence-building findings would be decisive for major
policy questions and to do so using existing and expected knowledge, skills and abilities,
as well as existing and expected financial resources.
VBA and VHA addressed the following areas for each topic:
Section I: Learning Agenda Questions
Section II: Background and Context
Section III: Required and Existing Evidence
Section IV: Evidence Gaps
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
The Learning Agenda business questions share a focus on medjum-term resolution
associated with the time horizon of strategic planning rather than urgent responses to
emergent issues. Therefore, topics of immediate consequence, such as those concerning
the acute phases of the COVID-19 pandemic, are not included, although VA remains
focused on robustly and expeditiously addressing such concerns and in the case of the
Page 136 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
COVID-19 pandemic, the FY 2023 Annual Evaluation Plan addresses the longer-term
impacts of it on patients, practitioners and healthcare systems. Likewise, VA studies
multigenerational variables, but in the context of a 6-year cycle that will focus on the
medium-term subset of larger issues.
VBA Learning Agenda
VBA's Learning Agenda has a significant focus on military-to-civilian transitions due to the
identification of significant research needs in this area. This need was identified by a
recent literature review by VHA which included academic articles, Congressional
testimony, VA project documentation from the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) and
reports from oversight organizations such as GAO, which focused on topics such as
military-to-civilian transition; integration and reintegration into civilian social structures;
transition stress; community reintegration and support structures; identity and military
culture; engagement of Service members and Veterans; and user-oriented design.
Many of the studies reviewed took a qualitative data-gathering approach that involved
interviewing small sets of recently transitioned Service members and Veterans to gather
direct information about experiences and insights into areas for further research with
expanded populations. In addition to explorations of transition within the United States,
the literature review included research and studies conducted with transitioning members
of the Canadian military and peacekeeping forces, as the Life After Service Survey
(LASS) program5 provides valuable insight on the transition process generally. The
review particularly emphasized literature pertaining to Service members and Veterans
who serve or have served post 9/11, as these Veterans became civilians relatively
recently, and their experiences allow a timely look at the transition process.
In this analysis, VBA discovered the need for additional research focused on the transition
needs of younger and female Veterans, whose experiences introduce challenges that
differ from other Veterans. The review also identified the need to better understand the
applicability of skills obtained from the military experience within the civilian context.
Additionally identified needs related to the importance of research which included
transitioning Service members as a family unit both pre-and post-separation.
Service members who are transitioning from military to civilian life often experience a
variety of challenges, including residential moves and adjusting to new surroundings; new
jobs or potential periods of unemployment; and changes in household makeup. Often
these changes evoke significant uncertainty in the lives of Veterans, prompting potential
unease and anxiety, which can have significant repercussions on their financial situation
and emotional well-being.
To fully address the expanding needs of returning and transitioning Veterans, a more
holistic examination beyond the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is
warranted. 181 Numerous studies have identified the prevalence of diagnosed PTSD as
having an upper bound of 19% and even this number is questionable due to the quality of
181 Mobbs MC, Bonanno GA. Beyond war and PTSD: The crucial role of transition stress in the lives of
military veterans. Clin Psychology Review 2018, 59:137-144.
Page 137 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
the studies. 182 Most importantly, studies have linked individuals who experience transition
stress to those who seek treatment for mental and physical health challenges, including
suicidal ideation. This group includes Veterans not formally diagnosed with PTSD. 183, 184
A more holistic view of military-to-civilian transition is necessary to understand the factors
that contribute to transition challenges and determine the effectiveness of VBA programs
to aid Veterans with adjustment to civilian life.
Research indicates that 27% of Veterans state that they struggled with re-entry into
civilian life; this number jumps to 44% when the focus is on post-9/11 Veterans. 185 VBA,
as part of its Post-Separation Transition Assistance Program (PSTAP) Assessment
Outcomes Study Report, identified that over 60% of Veterans surveyed, who participated
in the program, agreed or strongly agreed that "The process of transitioning from active
duty was more challenging than I expected.' "186 Military-to-civilian transition challenges
extend beyond PTSD-related concerns. The increased focus on transition stress involves
framing that stress and the associated benefits, services and treatments that can help to
address it, as a normal part of the transition process.
There are many programs associated with providing support to Veterans and span across
organizational boundaries. Within VBA, Outreach, Transition and Economic Development
(OTED) has primary responsibility for identifying and addressing post-separation goals of
the military-to-civilian transition process, of which a key component is TAP. The modern
TAP was established in 1991 to ease the transition of Service members who were
involuntarily separated from the military. The program has evolved to serve all eligible
transitioning Service members in their transition from military to civilian life with the
institution of the Veterans Opportunity to Work (VOW) to Hire Heroes Act of 2011, Public
Law (P.L.) 112-56. 187
Military-to-Civilian Readiness Research Paper: The Past, Present and Future of the
Transition Process
In 2020, VBA commissioned a research paper, using data gathered from human-centered
design studies and strategic assessments that were previously completed.
182 Kathryn M. Magruder, MPH, PhD; Derik E. Yeager, MBS. The Prevalence of PTSD across War Eras and
the Effect of Deployment on PTSD: a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Psychiatric Annals 2009;39(8).
183 Interian, A. Kline, A Janal, M Glynn, S and Loscanzy, M. Multiple Deployments and Combat Trauma: Do
Homefront Stressors Increase the Risk for Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms? Journal of Traumatic Stress
27(1), 90.
184 Kline, et al. (2010). Effects of repeated deployment to Iraq and Afghanistan on the health of New Jersey
Army National Guard troops: Implications for military readiness. American Journal of Public Health (100),
276-283.
185 Morin R. The difficult transition from military to civilian life. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center.
2011.
186 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Outreach, Transition and Economic Development, Post-
Separation Transition Assistance Program (TAP) Assessment (PSTAP) 2020 Cross Sectional Survey
Report.
187 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Outreach, Transition and Economic Development, Post-
Separation Transition Assistance Program (TAP) Assessment (PSTAP) 2019 Cross Sectional Survey
Report, p. 8
Page 138 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
It examined existing research gathered via a literature review focused on readiness for
the shift to civilian life to describe the current transition experience and underscore gaps
in the existing process. VBA is continuing to expand the research scope, engage
Veterans on their transition concerns and analyze data from internal and external sources
to identify additional topics relevant to the transition process. The paper identified topics
for future inquiry related to factors that involve, among others, the transition challenges for
younger and female Veterans, examining Veterans and their families simultaneously, or
as a family unit, both pre- and post-separation and developing a framework for evaluating
the efficacy of institutions that promote "Veteran-friendly" programs. 188
In addition, VBA currently is analyzing the results of the PSTAP study to validate these
findings to determine if additional research is necessary.
Section I: Learning Agenda Questions
To develop its learning questions and approaches robustly, VBA held an agency-wide
elicitation of learning questions. To aid its Lines of Business and Staff Offices (LOB/SO)
in developing its earning questions, VBA hosted trainings that were designed to guide the
development of questions and approaches, as well as providing consultative assistance
during the developmental process.
VBA chose a decision support approach in its Learning Agenda development by guiding
the LOB/SO through exercises designed to determine key questions across four major
domains: strategy, policy, resource allocation and program operations. In this manner,
VBA believes that focusing evidence on needed leadership decision can improve the
quality of decision-making and impart the importance of building evidence in all its
programs and operations.
VBA also developed a template (Appendix A) to standardize submissions and help to
ensure quality.
Administration leadership then carefully reviewed each submission and selected a subset
for this Learning Agenda. VBA will review and track key Learning Questions submitted via
internal management review. VBA is developing a monitoring and tracking approach at
the enterprise level to examine elements of timeliness, completeness and quality of each
Learning Agenda topic.
VBA used a structured template (Appendix A) to support the development of its learning
questions. Following are the five learning questions grouped under three high-level
categories as follows:
1. Learning questions focused on underserved and vulnerable Veterans:
a. Are there observed differences in the access to and administration of Pension
benefits for underserved communities?
b. To what extent will climate change and the financial risks it introduces affect the
Home Loan Program, and what changes would better integrate climate-related
188
Demers A. When veterans return: The role of community in reintegration. J Loss Trauma.
2011;16(2):160-179.
Page 139 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
financial risks into VA policies and financial management to mitigate financial
risks?
C. Can Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs) be updated to improve data
capture capabilities for tracking at-risk Veterans with a reported level of risk for
suicide?
2. Learning question focused on the Military-to-Civilian transition process:
a. To what extent is VA's Transition Assistance Program supporting the transition
needs of newly separated Veterans?
3. Learning question focused on both underserved Veterans and the Military-to-
Civilian transition process:
a. How can VBA, working together with VHA and other stakeholders, better
understand when MST survivors are not optimally served and/or negatively
impacted when interacting with VBA?
Following are the detailed descriptions of the learning questions along with information
regarding alignment with VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan, background, evidence needed,
plan for progress, risks associated and attestation of available resources.
VBA Learning Agenda Question 1a: Equity Assessment-Advancing Equity to
Underserved Populations
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
"Are there observed differences in the access to and administration of Pension benefits
for underserved communities?
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 2.3: (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Accessibility (I-DEA))
VA will enhance understanding of Veteran
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
needs and eliminate disparities and barriers
to health, improve service delivery and
Strategy 2.3.1: Equity to
opportunities to enhance Veterans'
Marginalized/Underserved
outcomes, experiences and quality of life.
Communities
Section II: Background and Context
This question was submitted by the Pension and Fiduciary Service/ 21PF. The VA
Pension program provides monthly benefits payments to wartime Veterans who meet
certain age or disability requirements and who have income and net worth within certain
limits. The purpose of this learning question is to understand if there are observed
differences in the access to and administration of Pension benefits for underserved
communities (as defined by section 2(b) within Executive Order 13985, Advancing Racial
Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government) and,
if so, altering policies and procedures with the goal of eliminating differences. The
question falls under the categories of "Theory of Change" and "Foundational Research."
Scope is both "Strategic" and "Operational".
Page 140 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Section III: Required and Existing Evidence
Evidence needed can be categorized as data related to "Policy Analysis" and "Program
Evaluation." Data needed consists of communication methods; number of Pension
applicants; number of Pension recipients; reasons for denial of Pension benefits; and
demographic data on Pension applicants and recipients. The data identified is maintained
by VA's Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW) and the VA/DoD Identity Repository.
Section IV: Evidence Gaps
Current Veteran demographic data on benefits recipients are not comprehensive enough
to use for many types of studies that could address a Learning Agenda question. VBA
collects some age, education, gender, income and physical location data in the Annual
Benefits Report, but only some race/ethnicity data. Also, items such as familial status,
housing status, sexual orientation and gender identity are not identified. As a way to
mitigate these previous areas of data limitations, VBA will incorporate additional data
sources and demographic categories as needed based on an analysis of its current data.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
VBA's Pension and Fiduciary Service plans to use existing data and create supplemental
data through use of other data or data protocols (e.g., to identify demographics for
population being examined). Demographic variable may include race, ethnicity, gender,
age and location. VBA will work with internal and external specialists to identify ways to
supplement extant data.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
Resources are included within the current staffing/full time equivalent (FTE) plan.
VBA Learning Agenda Question 1b: Impact of Climate Change on VA Home Loan
Program - identify climate-related financial risks to the VA Home Loan Program and
integrate climate-related financial risk into program management and identify or make
changes to the program to mitigate climate-related financial risk.
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
"To what extent will climate change and the financial risks it introduces affect the Home
Loan Program and what changes would better integrate climate-related financial risks into
VA policies and financial management to mitigate financial risks?"
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 4.4: (Evidence Based Decisions) VA will improve governance, management
practices and make evidence-based
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
decisions to ensure quality outcomes and
experiences and efficient use of resources.
4.4.6: Climate Change
Section II: Background and Context
VA, and particularly the Loan Guaranty Service (LGY), from a policy and financial
perspective, wishes to understand how it could adjust aspects of the VA Home Loan
Page 141 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Program and its risk management framework so that LGY can adapt to impacts of climate
change. In considering such adjustments, LGY must be able to not only understand the
impact to Veterans and taxpayers but must also understand the impact of any changes on
the secondary market to ensure the VA-guaranteed loan remains a marketable product.
Question type is "Foundational research."
Section III: Required and Existing Evidence
The Evidence types of "Research" and "Policy analysis" will be used. The types of
evidence are identified in Section V.
Section IV: Evidence Gaps
Current Veteran demographic data on benefits recipients are not comprehensive enough
to use for many types of studies that could address a Learning Agenda question. VBA
collects some age, education, gender, income and physical location data in the Annual
Benefits Report, but only some race/ ethnicity data. Also, items such as familial status,
housing status, sexual orientation and gender identity are not identified. VBA will publish
any additional data elements received into existing reporting.
In addition to the evidence gaps related to demographic factors, VA LGY also will be
incorporating the work as related to the EO13040 Section 5(c) Task Force.
There is insufficient market analysis; LGY is relying on the contract as outlined in
Sections V and VI, to provide data to help drive decisions.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
LGY lacks the historical and current market analysis to make any changes currently.
Therefore, LGY, sought out and accepted a contract that will provide them with the
necessary data and recommendations based on the analysis. Evaluation would then be
the method.
LGY will analyze the data to determine what changes might be made to the program and
its risk management framework and policies to adapt to climate change. LGY also will
assess whether the impact of these possible changes would be positive or negative for
key stakeholders, including borrowers, taxpayers/the Government, the housing market,
etc.
Once LGY completes its assessment of what changes might be incorporated into its
policies and/or legal authorities it will develop a plan to update systems and to
communicate changes to its stakeholders and staff.
Anticipated challenges: How would policy decisions to better manage or mitigate
climate-related risks affect access to the home loan benefit?
What financial impact does climate change have on the 3.5M active loans in the
portfolio?
How would policy decisions to better-manage or mitigate climate-related risks affect
the home loan program's cost to taxpayers?
Page 142 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
What decisions are external stakeholders making about investing in VA loans and
what decisions are lenders making about borrowers (credit, capacity, collateral and
capital)?
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
The external contract to conduct a review of available data is funded and any required
enhancements to systems/future enhancements would be addressed during the formal
budget process.
VBA Learning Agenda Question 1c: Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs)
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
"Can Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs) be updated to improve data capture
capabilities for tracking at-risk Veterans with a reported level of risk for suicide?'
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 2.1: (Underserved, marginalized
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
and at-risk Veterans) VA emphasizes the
delivery of benefits, care and services to
2.1.1: Mental Health
underserved, marginalized and at-risk
and Suicide Prevention
Veterans to prevent suicide and
homelessness, improve their economic
security, health, resiliency and quality of life
and achieve equity.
Section II: Background and Context
VBA's Medical Disability Examinations Office (MDEO) seeks to explore DBQs, update
options for XSD driven data capture that could allow for tracking of at-risk Veterans with a
reported level of high acute (defined) and intermediate acute (defined) risk for suicide.
Data traceability is the ability to ensure that collected data is completely "findable" across
the entire landscape. Learning question type is "Foundational Research"-Seeking a
better understanding of a technical capability/technology. Scope is "Operational."
Section III: Required and Existing Evidence
MDEO expects this foundational review to include an exploration of the current state of
the ability for DBQs to identify at-risk Veterans, identify advances in data collection and
mining abilities (data traceability) that are the result of on-going collaborative creation and
implementation efforts by MDEO and the Office of Automated Benefit Delivery (ABD), and
the relational information regarding currently available at-risk Veteran data. As part of that
foundational review, MDEO expects to collect information that will allow for an
assessment of the potential impacts DBQ updates may create regarding improvement in
capturing related data and data traceability of at-risk Veterans.
MDEO currently collaborates with ABD on DBQ related data improvement efforts (i.e.,
DBQ content and format, data schemas and information defined in the DBQ Information
Exchange Package Documentation (IEPD) with associated data validations, collection,
and reporting functionality). Therefore, data and evidence review for this purpose would
Page 143 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
be minimal, as the mechanisms for review are currently in place and would require limited
expansion.
Section IV: Evidence Gaps
Current Veteran demographic data on benefits recipients are not comprehensive enough
to use for many types of studies that could address a Learning Agenda question. VBA
collects some age, education, gender, income and physical location data in the Annual
Benefits Report, but only some race/ ethnicity data. Also, items such as familial status,
housing status, sexual orientation and gender identity are not identified.
Mitigation strategy-MDEC expects the foundational review will result in identification of
gaps in information that could allow a decision to be made regarding the feasibility of
leveraging the DBQ medical data and Veteran specific metadata that is captured as a
result of the XSD/IEPD-based responses, in addition to other existing VA approved
sources, that may potentially allow for appropriate data mining and traceability across VA
systems. The review aims to determine if DBQ updates can be used, with acceptable risk
mitigation, to improve our ability to identify more accurate populations, data sets, etc.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
MDEO will utilize the foundational review design to explore the current state of, to include
existing information and gaps, as well as planned improvements to, such as the work
underway in collaboration with the Office of Automated Benefit Delivery (ABD), data
collection techniques to determine the feasibility of utilizing DBQ updates to contribute to
VA's capacity to track at-risk Veterans.
Once MDEO completes the foundational review, it will communicate collaboratively with
all VA stakeholders and offices, identified as part of the foundational review, to review and
assess outcomes and initiate decision-making processes to determine actions needed, if
any.
Anticipated challenges: Any delay to MDEO's current multi-year planning and VBA IT
Investment Roadmap, especially the XSD mapping plans, will hinder the ability to
complete the research.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
Resources are included in current multi-year planning and VBA IT Investment Roadmap.
VBA Learning Agenda Question 2a: Evaluation of Transition Assistance Program
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
"To what extent is VA's Transition Assistance Program (TAP) supporting the transition
needs of newly separated Veterans?"
Page 144 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 2.1: (Underserved, Marginalized
and At-Risk Veterans) VA emphasizes the
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
delivery of benefits, care and services to
Strategy 2.1.7: Military
underserved, marginalized and at-risk
to Civilian Transition
Veterans to prevent suicide and
Strategy 2.2.6: Job
homelessness, improve their economic
Readiness/Placement
security, health, resiliency and quality of life
and achieve equity.
Objective 2.2: (Tailored delivery of benefits, care and services ensure equity and
access) VA and partners will tailor delivery of benefits and customize whole health care
and services for the recipient at each phase of their life journey, including end of life, to
ensure equity and address their unique needs, preferences, challenges and goals.
Military-to-Civilian Transition complements two strategies in the FY 2022-28 Strategic
Plan. Implementing Strategy 2.1.7 is specific to the Military-to-Civilian Transition: VA and
partners provides holistic assessments and transition support to understand "economic
well-being" for all transitioning Service members, Veterans, their families and caregivers
to improve their economic security, health and quality of life outcomes. Implementing
Strategy 2.2.6 regarding job readiness and placement for Service members and
transitioned Veterans, "VA promotes the building of high-performing partnerships to
enhance Veteran job-readiness and placement.' VBA's Learning Agenda and strategies
2.1.7 and 2.2.6 will work together to build high-performing partnerships that ensure a
seamless transition from military service to civilian life and promote long-term economic
security for Veterans.
Section II: Background and Context
OTED's VA TAP is a one-day course called VA Benefits and Services. Led by VA
Benefits Advisors, the course helps transitioning Service members understand how to
navigate VA and the benefits and services they have earned through their military career.
The course offers interactive exercises, real examples and covers important topics like
family support, disability compensation, education and health care benefits. Purpose of
the question is to evaluate the effectiveness of TAP and to identify any gaps and inform
future improvements. Question types can be categorized as "Theory of Change" to
ensure VA TAP is achieving the desired outcomes and "Foundational Research" to better
understand the transitioning population and their needs. Scope is "Strategic" and
"Programmatic" to allow VBA to meet its strategic objectives vis-a-vis transition and make
improvements to the programs and activities in the transition space.
Section III: Required and Existing Evidence
Currently, VBA is in the third year of a multi-year analysis known as the Post-Separation
Transition Assistance Program Assessment (PSTAP) Outcomes Study. The PSTAP is
comprised of two separate survey instruments currently in use (initial study launched in
June of 2019) used to assess TAP as well as provide holistic feedback and information
used to improve transition and other VA activities.
Page 145 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
1. Annual cross-sectional survey of three cohorts that provides a point-in-time set of
results across the post-separation space.
2. Annual longitudinal survey of Veterans that "opt-in" to be part of a longer-term
study from cross-sectional survey that provides trends over time and more focused
investigation. PSTAP reports are located at: VBA's PSTAP Reports.
The PSTAP uses various analytical methods to develop the reports/findings, such as
statistical modeling and regression analysis on various sections to determine the relative
importance and weight of the information to Veterans. Regression analysis is conducted
to identify which courses have the most impact on increasing satisfaction with TAP. An
additional regression model is run on the entire respondent population to identify possible
demographic differences that may influence satisfaction with TAP. To understand the
factors that have a significant impact on the transition of Veterans to civilian employment
and their relationship to TAP, a statistical model was built using logistic regression. The
model analyzed which challenges were most impactful to Veterans' overall satisfaction
with TAP using the question: "Overall, the program was beneficial in helping me gain the
information and skills I needed to prepare me for my transition and post-military life."
Section IV: Evidence Gaps
Current Veteran demographic data on benefits recipients are not comprehensive enough
to use for many types of studies that could address a Learning Agenda question. VBA
collects some age, education, gender, income and physical location data in the Annual
Benefits Report, but only some race/ ethnicity data. Also, items such as familial status,
housing status, sexual orientation and gender identity are not identified. Mitigation
strategy-VBA will incorporate additional data sources and demographic categories as
needed based on an analysis of its current data. New data will come from a variety of
internal and external sources, including but not limited to various sections of Public Law
116-315, Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits
Improvement Act Of 2020. Specifically, VBA will incorporate data from section 4305, One-
Year Independent Assessment of the Effectiveness of Transition Assistance Program,
and section 4306, Longitudinal Study on Changes to Transition Assistance Program of
the law. In addition, the PSTAP assessments are revised as required and new
administrative data from VA, DoD and other external partners are added to the analysis in
an ongoing manner and also will be included as they become available.
Factors contributing to the lower life satisfaction scores of African Americans surveyed
were captured through the PSTAP Outcomes study. Mitigation strategy-VBA is
determining the priority Learning Agenda question or questions needed and the evidence-
building strategies needed to answer them. VBA is conducting a root cause analysis to
determine what factors may contribute to this outcome.
There is insufficient understanding of the application of skills and attributes gained in the
military-to-civilian work-life balance in the years following discharge from military service.
Mitigation strategy-VBA is determining the priority learning question or questions
needed and the evidence-building strategies needed to answer them.
Page 146 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Improved data on length of military-to-civilian unemployment timeframes. Mitigation
strategy-VBA is in the process of working with the Department of Health and Human
Services to gain access to the Directory of New Hires and examine the data.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
The PSTAP Assessment consists of two surveys. Those surveys are the Cross-Sectional
Survey and the Longitudinal Survey. The Cross-Sectional Survey annually collects
information on Veterans who separated 6 months, 12 months and 36 months prior to
survey deployment. The survey included 55 questions in 2021. The topics covered by the
questions included participation in TAP classes, perceived utility of TAP classes
completed by the Veteran and multiple post-transition outcomes organized by subject
area. The post-transition outcomes contained five life domains: (1) employment, (2)
education, (3) health and relationships, (4) financial circumstances and (5) general
satisfaction and well-being. The survey also included two general open-ended response
questions that provided Veterans an opportunity to share thoughts about the TAP classes
and their transition.
The Longitudinal Survey explores the long-term outcomes of Veterans who completed the
Cross-Sectional Survey and approved their participation in the Longitudinal Survey. The
Longitudinal Survey includes all three cohorts from the 2019 Cross-Sectional Survey and
adds a single cohort (the 6-month cohort) from each subsequent Cross-Sectional Survey.
The survey included 57 questions in 2021. It covered topics including perceptions of the
utility of the VA TAP Benefits and Services briefings, challenges during the transition
process, employment status, education, health and financial status and life satisfaction.
Survey questions, when applicable, mirrored the Cross-Sectional Survey to allow for trend
analysis in the long-term study. The survey also included one open-ended question to
allow Veterans to provide additional insight into their lives over the past 12 months.
The PSTAP study invites approximately 165 thousand participants from the target time
from separation for the cross-sectional portion and approximately 10 thousand for the
longitudinal. The longitudinal participants will increase each year as another cohort is
added from the previous year's cross sectional. Participants are provided with a postcard
invite to take the survey online, periodic email reminders throughout the execution phase.
The survey data is combined with VA and DoD administrative data to build the holistic
profile of the respondents and analysis is conducted across all the life domains, outcomes
and TAP assessment.
Regression analysis is conducted to identify which courses have the most impact on
increasing satisfaction with TAP. An additional regression model is run on the entire
respondent population to identify possible demographic differences that may influence
satisfaction with TAP. To understand the factors that have a significant effect on the
transition of Veterans to civilian employment and their relationship to TAP, a statistical
model was built using logistic regression. The model analyzed which challenges were
most impactful to Veterans' overall satisfaction with TAP using the statement: "Overall,
the program was beneficial in helping me gain the information and skills I needed to
prepare me for my transition and post-military life."
Page 147 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Anticipated challenge: Possible need for additional research to supplement and support
findings.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
Resources are included in current staffing/FTE plan. The FY23 Budget Submission
included resources for this effort.
VBA Learning Agenda Question 3a: Understanding Military Sexual Trauma (MST)
Survivor Experience
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
"How can VBA, working together with VHA and other stakeholders, better understand
when MST survivors are not optimally served and/or negatively impacted when interacting
with VBA?"
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 1.2: (Lifelong Relationships and
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Trust) VA listens to Veterans, their families,
caregivers, survivors, Service members,
Strategy 1.2.1: (Improved
employees and other stakeholders to project
Understanding)
future trends, anticipate needs and deliver
effective and agile solutions that improve their
outcomes, access and experiences.
Section II: Background and Context
VBA's Strategic Program Management Office (SPMO) seeks to understand MST survivor
experience. Strategic Goal-Trust; Veterans trust VBA to deliver benefits that enable
success throughout their lives. How can VBA, in coordination with VHA and other
stakeholders, better identify perceived and actual pain points (i.e., understand when MST
survivors are not optimally served and/or negatively impacted when interacting with VA).
At its initial stage the question falls under the category of "Foundational Research" (to
gain a better understanding of the MST survivor population) leading to "Scenario
Planning" to understand approaches that better address pain points experienced when
MST survivors interact with VA. Scope is "Strategic."
Section III: Required and Existing Evidence
The evidence types are combination of "Research" and "Policy Analysis. Required
evidence includes the demographics of MST survivors; DoD information on Service
member MST survivors' pain points; VHA data on interaction with MST survivors; and
public data on survivors of sexual assault. Available data sources include qualitative and
quantitative MST data gathered from Veteran's surveys (VSignals), internal stakeholder
interviews (e.g., MST coordinators) and publications. In addition, journey mapping will be
employed as a methodological approach to build foundational evidence, through survivor
interviews, on MST survivors' pain points and bright spots regarding their claims
experience.
Page 148 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Section IV: Evidence Gaps
Current Veteran demographic data on benefits recipients are not comprehensive enough
to use for many types of studies that could address a Learning Agenda question. VBA
collects some age, education, gender, income and physical location data in the Annual
Benefits Report, but only some race/ ethnicity data. Also, items such as familial status,
housing status, sexual orientation and gender identity are not identified. VBA will
incorporate existing qualitative and quantitative MST data gathered from Veteran's
surveys (VSignals), internal stakeholder interviews (MST coordinators, Veteran's Survey
Officers), web forums, publications and journals into existing VBA data repositories and
make available through existing High-Impact Service Provider reports.
There is insufficient understanding of the application of skills and attributes gained in the
military-to-civilian work-life balance in the years following discharge from military service.
Mitigation strategy-VBA is determining the priority learning question or questions
needed and the evidence-building strategies needed to answer them.
Improved data on length of military-to-civilian unemployment timeframes. Mitigation
strategy-VBA is in the process of working with the Department of Health and Human
Services to gain access to the Directory of New Hires and examine the data.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
Methods to be used are human centered design, journey mapping, customer persona
development and statistical analyses. Results will be documented in a structured manner
and made available through targeted stakeholder briefings to organizations in VA. As
appropriate, VBA will work closely with Office of Executive Review (OER) and Office of
Congressional and Legislative Affairs (OCLA) to disseminate the information to public
forums and to Congressional oversight bodies. Data will be controlled and secured in
accordance with VA Data Governance directives and VA policy.
Anticipated challenges: Maintaining appropriate Confidentiality of Data. Given the highly
sensitive nature of the topic, care will be taken in terms of identification of interview
subjects and data collection/dissemination methods. Coordination among stakeholders.
Stakeholders from across VA (potential external stakeholders) will require them to commit
resources. Availability of SPMO capacity: To achieve valuable results, SPMO will need to
ensure appropriate resources are available.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
VBA will work in concert with Veterans Experience Office (VEO) and VHA, leveraging
resources already allocated. A need to justify out-year resources may be required.
Section V: General Challenges
VBA identified in its Learning Agenda questions, challenges specific to the questions
submitted. In addition, VBA recognizes the following challenges as general in nature to
addressing the Learning Agenda questions:
1. Tracking outcomes of Veterans after completion of benefits. VBA has established
communication modes with Veterans while they are applying for a claim or
participating in benefits programs. Collecting data regarding the outcomes on
Page 149 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Veterans' lives post-benefits delivery will provide insight into the long-term benefits
of programs. Developing the communications approach and data collection
methods for tracking these outcomes requires effort and resources.
2. Increasing internal understanding of the need to examine Veteran outcomes. As
identified in its initial capacity assessment, VBA currently captures and uses
evidence to improve operational processes including claims processing. VBA is
building the communications and change management needed to build evidence to
assess the outcomes and impact of programs.
3. Developing or gaining access to data of Veterans who do not use VBA programs.
Veterans who might be underserved by VBA-those who earned benefits but have
not taken advantage of them-may have no or limited connection to VBA. VBA
must develop the means to understand this population as a way to build evidence.
VHA Learning Agenda
Section I: Learning Agenda Questions
VHA will pursue five Learning Agenda questions/topics with focused studies for each. The
questions are:
1. What are the ways VA can ensure Veterans have access to timely care in their
preferred setting? (Access to Care pursuant to VA Strategic Goal 2, Objectives 2.1,
2.2 and 2.3.)
2. What are the ways VHA can provide clinically appropriate pain management to
Veterans while simultaneously decreasing dependence on opioids? (Pain
Management & Opioids pursuant to VA Strategic Goal 2, Objective 2.4.)
3. What strategies work best to prevent suicide among Veterans? (Suicide Prevention
pursuant to VA Strategic Goal 2, Objectives 2.1 and 2.4.)
4. To what extent have military environmental exposures during their period of
service harmed Veterans, especially regarding latent or chronic adverse health
effects? (Environmental Exposure pursuant to VA Strategic Goal 2, Objective 2.4.)
5. What are the best strategies to implement state of the art evaluation and care
models to provide effective care for Veterans exposed to toxic burn pit smoke and
other military-related airborne hazards? (Environmental Exposure pursuant to VA
Strategic Goal 2, Objective 2.4.)
How Learning Agenda Questions Were Chosen
VHA, primarily through ORD and Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), uses
a lifecycle that was created in 2019 to identify top health care priorities based on the ORD
goal of enhancing the substantial real-world impact of research. QUERI further adapted
the lifecycle per request from the VHA Governance Board and input from FEBPWG to
formalize a process for prioritizing, deploying and reporting on Learning Agenda goals
and updating evidence-building activities and evaluation plans on a regular basis.
Specifically, QUERI identifies learning agenda questions, evidence building activities and
Page 150 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
evaluation plans based on multiple sources of stakeholder input (see Figure 1). On
occasion, Congress will mandate a priority through legislation or appropriation. Priorities
that lead to evidence-building activities including evaluation plans also then undergo
standardized peer review processes to ensure independence and integrity of findings.
The process begins with solicitation of top national evaluation priorities from multi-level
stakeholders. Then QUERI, after aligning priorities with VA and VHA strategic goals,
releases a request for applications from investigators to operationalize Learning Agenda
goals, notably through evidence-building activities and annual evaluation plans.
Independent expert reviewers who are determined to be without conflict of interest are
assigned to each plan and score and critique them. Certain evidence-building activities
and evaluations are approved as high-quality evaluations (approximately 50%) and
receive funding; funding decisions are based on the overall quality of the proposal,
alignment with priorities and availability of funds. These evaluations are expected to
publish results in scientific peer-reviewed journals, which are subsequently tracked in
PubMed (National Library of Medicine).
Local, regional, and
national stakeholders
identify priorities via
national survey
Vote on top priorities
Progress reporting
National leaders concur
Benchmark on agency
on priorities, identify
performance goals
urgent and long-term
Recommendations to
EA Eval. questions,
policymakers
Legislative Proposals
Evaluations funded,
Scientific peer-review,
selection of evaluations
planning and execution
begins
including Evidence Act
evaluation plans
Figure 1. Lifecycle to Identify & Implement VHA Priority Learning Agenda, Evidence-Building Activities and
Evaluation Plans.
Page 151 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VHA Learning Agenda Question 1: Access to Care
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
What are the ways VA can ensure Veterans have access to timely care in their preferred
setting?
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 2.1: (Underserved, marginalized
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
and at-risk Veterans) VA emphasizes the
delivery of benefits, care and services to
Strategy 2.1.8: Rural Health
underserved, marginalized and at-risk
Strategy 2.2.3: Telehealth/
Veterans to prevent suicide and
Connected Care
homelessness, improve their economic
security, health, resiliency and quality of life
Strategy 2.3.1: Equity to
and achieve equity.
Underserved Communities
Objective 2.2: (Tailored delivery of benefits, care and services ensure equity and
access) VA and partners will tailor delivery of benefits and customize whole health care
and services for the recipient at each phase of their life journey.
Objective 2.3: (Inclusion, diversity, equity, accessibility (I-DEA)) VA will leverage
research studies, innovation and partnerships to enhance understanding of Veteran
needs and eliminate disparities and barriers to health, improve service delivery and
opportunities to enhance Veterans' outcomes, experiences and quality of life.
VHA Learning Agenda Question 1 (Access to Care) aligns to three strategies in the FY
2022-28 Strategic Plan. Implementing Strategy 2.1.8 addresses access to care for rural
Veterans, "VA increases access to virtual and in-home health care and promotes Federal
and community care solutions to improve well-being for Veterans in underserved rural
areas." Implementing Strategy 2.2.3 is specific to telehealth and connected care for all
Veterans, "Transformative virtual health technologies and devices deliver convenient,
anytime and anyplace access to the care Veteran's need, when and where they need it."
Finally, Implementing Strategy 2.3.1 is regarding equity to marginalized and underserved
communities, "Policies and programs address persistent, systemic inequity and barriers to
benefits, care, memorialization and services for marginalized and underserved
communities to strengthen the experience and improve outcomes for all Veterans."
Section II: Background and Context
Most Veterans who are enrolled in VHA care live in areas with limited access to health
care services. The VA Maintaining Internal Systems and Strengthening Integrated
Outside Networks (MISSION) Act of 2018 189, 190 with increased investments in VHA's
telemedicine infrastructure, has increased timely Veteran access to care, particularly for
189
Veterans Access, Choice and Accountability Act of 2014, Pub. L. No. 113-146, STAT. 1754 (2014)).
190 VA MISSION Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-182, STAT. 2372 (2018).
Page 152 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
those in underserved regions. Since 2014, VA has seen an increase of 3.4 million
appointments and reported over 58 million appointments at VA facilities in FY 2019. 191
Efforts to obtain decisive evidence in this area will be ongoing with no end date. Rather,
each year VHA will learn more about VHA's supply of health care, Veterans' demand for
health care and the best approaches to address both.
VA will conduct three studies to build evidence for the access to care Learning Agenda
question:
[Note: Each study described below presents its own sections on existing/required
evidence and evidence gaps, while the risks and their mitigation for this part of the
Learning Agenda are common to the three studies.]
1.1 VA MISSION Act of 2018 Section 401 Underserved Facilities & Populations
Sections III & IV: Required and Existing Evidence & Evidence Gaps
Approximately 16% of Veterans live within primary care shortage areas and 70.2% live in
mental health care shortage areas. 192 To address this issue VHA's Office for Veterans
Access to Care (OVAC), in collaboration with other research and operations offices,
developed scoring algorithms to identify underserved VA medical facilities in both primary
care and mental health services. 193 The algorithms are used to update an annual list of
underserved facilities, using data collected from VHA data warehouses and community-
based sources like the Area Health Resources File. Annually, the top twenty underserved
facilities must develop action plans explaining how they will improve Veteran access to
care. Future evaluations will more explicitly study the impacts of MISSION 401 on
underserved subpopulations and historically marginalized communities (e.g., women
Veterans, Veterans of color, rural Veterans), assessing what demographic information is
currently available and how resources may be allocated to address gaps and inequities in
service.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
In 2019, OVAC submitted the first annual report to Congress that included the action
plans from the top seven underserved facilities. The facilities centered their mitigation
strategies in three areas: personnel-focused (recruit and retain high-need providers),
telehealth-focused (increase telehealth capacity) and infrastructure-focused (increase
physical space, as needed). OVAC and its partners will track a variety of metrics
constructed using administrative data and site visits and interviews to evaluate the
effectiveness of these mitigation strategies at addressing facility-level underservedness.
VA will use regression models to control for potential confounding factors and to test the
statistical significance of between group differences. This evaluation work will be ongoing
beyond FY 2022. The FY 2022 Evaluation Plan and its successors provide further details.
191 VA MISSION Act of 2018 section 101: how the law will improve VA's ability to deliver health care to
Veterans. Vantage Point (2019)
192 Ohl, M, Carrell, M, Thurman, A. Availability of healthcare providers for rural Veterans eligible for
purchased care under the Veterans choice act. BMC Health Services research. (2018)).
193 VA MISSION Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-182, STAT. 2372 (2018)).
Page 153 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
1.2 VA MISSION Act of 2018 Section 507 Medical Scribes Pilot Program
Sections III & IV: Required and Existing Evidence & Evidence Gaps
VHA developed a 2-year medical scribes pilot in VA's emergency departments and
specialty care clinics to help improve provider productivity and increase Veterans' access
to care. 194 OVAC, in partnership with research offices is evaluating the implementation
and impact of the scribes program on clinic efficiency and patient and provider
satisfaction, as well as determining differences between VA and contract-hired scribes.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
OVAC anticipates submitting annual reports to Congress on the pilot's progress and
impact. VA will collect data for the evaluations through various means including interviews
and administrative data. VA will complete this evaluation work in FY 2022 and additional
effort is not expected. Further details are in the VA FY 2022 Annual Evaluation Plan. This
evaluation was included in these documents as it was congressionally mandated under
the VA MISSION Act of 2018 and assessed a critical need linked to access to care and to
provider burnout.
1.3 Increasing Use of Telehealth
Sections III & IV: Existing and Required Evidence and the Evidence Gaps
Telehealth is a useful tool to for VHA to improve access to care for Veterans. It allows
resources to be distributed based on need, regardless of physical location.
To increase the use of telehealth, VHA's Office of Connected Care implemented the
"Anywhere to Anywhere" initiative. 195 The goal is to allow VHA providers to administer
care through telehealth services across state lines, increasing Veteran access to quality
health care. The VA's Evidence Synthesis Program is assessing the initiative's
effectiveness to deliver VA mental and primary health care for Veterans. The researchers
found that video treatments and in-person treatments yielded similar outcomes in patient
satisfaction, number of sessions completed, cost, effectiveness and other clinically
significant measures.
Section V: Plan for Progress & Risks
VA will study various forms of telehealth in the MISSION Act Section 401 evaluation as
mitigation strategies for underservedness. Other sections of the MISSION Act, such as
section 402, also focus on optimizing the use of telehealth within VHA. VA is considering
additional evaluation work and will likely identify new projects in upcoming Learning
Agenda and Annual Evaluation Plan cycles. For example, a new evaluation was included
in the FY 2023 Evaluation Plan that studies the use of telehealth to improve access to
care for marginalized populations (e.g., women Veterans, Veterans of color, rural
Veterans) and its impact on clinic functionality and Veteran health outcomes.
Obtaining access to complete Veteran data from non-VHA care settings is a challenge.
Since the implementation of the MISSION Act, the Office of Community Care and other
194 VA MISSION Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-182, STAT. 2372 (2018)).
195
Lum, H, Nearing, K, Pimentel, C. Anywhere to anywhere: use of telehealth to increase health access for
older, rural Veterans. Public Policy & Aging Report. (2019)).
Page 154 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
research and operations offices have collaborated to fill many data gaps, such as a
research consortium created by Health Services Research & Development to develop the
formal infrastructure needed to streamline and facilitate sufficient access to VHA and non-
VHA data. Efforts to improve data access are ongoing.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
Current or anticipated resources are sufficient to carry out these evidence-building
evaluation activities.
VHA Learning Agenda Question 2: Pain Management and Opioids
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
What are the ways VHA can provide clinically appropriate pain management to Veterans
while simultaneously decreasing dependence on opioids?
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Implementing Strategy Objective 2.4:
FY 2022-28 Strategic
(Innovative care) VA will improve
Plan
understanding of Veteran specific illnesses
and injuries to develop and adopt innovative
Strategy 2.4.4: Opioid
new treatments that prevent future illness and
Use Disorder
enhance Veteran outcomes.
VHA Learning Agenda Question 2 (Pain Management and Opioids) aligns to one
strategy in the VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan. Implementing Strategy 2.4.4 for Opioid Use
Disorder: "VA partners to identify Veterans and Service members vulnerable to opioid use
disorder and develops personalized interventions to prevent or address adverse
outcomes from opioid-related dependency and improve Veterans' health and quality of
life. This strategy was written specifically to complement VHA's efforts to address pain
management and opioid abuse disorder and improve outcomes for at-risk and vulnerable
Veterans.
Section II: Background and Context
The opioid epidemic has ravaged communities in the United States with increasing
severity over the last few decades. 196 Veterans face an increased likelihood of developing
opioid use disorder (OUD) due to unique military stressors such as deployment and
reintegration, as well as common medical conditions such as chronic pain or mental
health diagnoses. 197,198 In 2018, over 900,000 Veterans treated in VHA had an opioid
prescription; in 2019, over 71,000 Veterans treated in VHA were diagnosed with an
196
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Understanding the Epidemic. (2017)).
197 Teeters J, Lancaster C, Brown D. Substance use disorders in military veterans: prevalence and
treatment challenges. Substance Abuse Rehabilitation. (2017)).
198 Seal KH, Shi Y, et al. Association of mental health disorders with prescription opioids and high-risk
opioid use in US veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan. JAMA. (2012)).
Page 155 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
OUD.
199,200 This is inclusive of Veterans with both acute and chronic needs; addressing
both is key for effective, appropriate VHA care.
This problem is also significant in the context of vulnerable and marginalized Veteran
populations, notably justice-involved Veterans as they transition out of incarceration.
Justice-involved populations have considerable burdens of chronic physical and
behavioral health conditions including alcohol use disorder, mental illness and substance
use disorder (SUD).
201,202,203 Similarly, individuals who have recently been released from
correctional facilities are at increased risk of homelessness, with 30% experiencing some
homelessness post-release, compared to 6% among the general population of adult
men.9 Ensuring that these Veterans are able to access appropriate treatment services
and maintain continuity of care is critical in reducing recidivism and promoting long-term
stability and well-being post-release.
Efforts to obtain evidence in this area will be ongoing with no firm end date. Rather, each
year VHA will learn more about VHA's pain management and OUD treatment efforts and
the best approaches to improve both. What's more, a notable challenge to this work is
that VHA is unable to observe prescriptions and opioid-related adverse events that occur
outside of the VHA system. This area likely will be an area of future study.
VA will conduct three studies to build evidence for the pain management and opioids
Learning Agenda question.
[Note: Each study described below presents its own sections on existing/required
evidence and evidence gaps, while risks and their mitigation for this part of the Learning
Agenda are common to the three studies.]
2.2.1 Stratification Tool for Opioid Risk Mitigation (STORM)
Sections III & IV: Existing and Required Evidence & Evidence Gaps
In 2017, VA developed the Stratification Tool for Opioid Risk Mitigation (STORM) to help
clinical providers identify Veterans who might be particularly vulnerable to negative
opioid-related outcomes and provide personalized interventions. 204 Demographic,
diagnostic, pharmacy and health care utilization data are pulled from the VA Corporate
Data Warehouse (CDW). This evaluation will determine if the use of the STORM tool
decreases the rate of opioid-related adverse outcomes and whether the inclusion of
199 Minegishi T. Changes in VA Opioid Prescribing Patterns Over Time. (2019). Unpublished.
200 U.S. Government Accountability Office. Veterans Health Care Services for Substance Use Disorders
and Efforts to Address Access Issues in Rural Areas. (2019)).
201 Kim B, et al., Coordinating across correctional, community and VA systems: applying the Collaborative
Chronic Care Model to post-incarceration healthcare and reentry support for veterans with mental health
and substance use disorders. Health Justice. 2019 Dec 12;7(1):18.
202 Binswanger, I.A., et al., Release from Prison - A High Risk of Death for Former Inmates. New England
Journal of Medicine, 2007. 356(2): p. 157-165.
203 Tsai, J., et al., Risk of incarceration and other characteristics of Iraq and Afghanistan era veterans in
state and Federal prisons. Psychiatry Serv, 2013. 64(1): p. 36-43.
204 Binswanger, I.A., et al., Release from Prison - A High Risk of Death for Former Inmates. New England
Journal of Medicine, 2007. 356(2): p. 157-165.
Page 156 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
consequences for failing to meet the minimum case review target would affect both the
behavior of VHA providers and the opioid-related adverse event rate.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
The STORM randomized program evaluation is underway. It assesses the impact of this
novel dashboard on Veteran mortality and opioid-related injuries, using case reviews and
a stepped-wedge cluster randomized design. The evaluators are using VA administrative
and clinical data to further examine the effects of the tool on patient-level opioid-related
serious adverse outcomes. The evaluation is currently in the analysis and dissemination
phase. 205 The initial evaluation ended in FY 2020 with plans to extend work beyond FY
2022. Thus far, evaluators have presented their findings at several conferences and to VA
leadership and have published peer-reviewed articles on study protocol and design. Refer
to the FY 2022 Annual Evaluation Plan for further details.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
Current or anticipated resources are sufficient to carry out these activities.
VHA Learning Agenda Question 3: Suicide Prevention
Section I: Learning Agenda Question
"What strategies work best to prevent suicide among Veterans?"
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 2.1: (Underserved, marginalized
and at-risk Veterans) V A emphasizes the
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
delivery of benefits, care and services to
Strategy 2.1.1: Mental
underserved, marginalized and at-risk
Health/Suicide
Veterans to prevent suicide and
Prevention (Focus on At-
homelessness, improve their economic
Risk Veterans)
security, health, resiliency and quality of life
Strategy 2.3.1: Equity to
and achieve equity.
Marginalized and
Objective 2.3: (Inclusion, diversity, equity,
Underserved
accessibility (I-DEA)) VA will leverage
Communities
research studies, innovation and partnerships
Strategy 2.4.1:
to enhance understanding of Veteran needs
Innovative Community-
and eliminate disparities and barriers to health,
Based Interventions
improve service delivery and opportunities to
(Focus on Mental
enhance Veterans' outcomes, experiences
Health/Suicide
and quality of life.
Prevention)
205 Tsai, J., et al., Risk of incarceration and other characteristics of Iraq and Afghanistan era veterans in
state and Federal prisons. Psychiatry Serv, 2013. 64(1): p. 36-43.
Page 157 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Objective 2.4: (Innovative care) VA will improve understanding of Veteran specific
illnesses and injuries to develop and adopt innovative new treatments that prevent future
illness and enhance Veteran outcomes.
Three strategies in the FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan align with Learning Agenda Question 3
(Suicide Prevention) and VHA efforts to address Veteran suicide. Implementing Strategy
2.1.1: "VA engages Veterans and Service members and delivers services and practices
that promote lifelong well-being and resilience to improve mental health, reduce Veteran
suicide and empower and equip them to achieve their life goals." This strategy describes
implementation of three specific strategies to connect with vulnerable Veterans at-risk for
suicide. Implementing Strategy 2.3.1 (Inclusion, diversity, equity, accessibility (I-DEA))
addresses persistent, systemic inequity and barriers to benefits, care, memorialization
and services for marginalized and underserved communities to strengthen the experience
and improve outcomes for all Veterans. VA conducts equity assessments, identifies data
and defines measures to recognize barriers to health outcomes, gaps in benefits, care,
memorialization and services and risks to underserved and marginalized Veterans to
implement this strategy. Implementing Strategy 2.4.2: "VA incorporates emerging and
innovative methods and technologies to better understand needs and improve the
delivery of benefits, care and services to Veterans, Service members, their families,
caregivers and survivors." This strategy describes formal and informal partnerships and
research efforts to develop innovative community-based interventions that identify high-
risk Veterans and connect with them in the communities where they live.
Section II: Background and Context
Suicide is a leading cause of death in the Veteran population. Veterans accounted for
13.5% of all deaths by suicide among U.S. adults in 2017.206 Suicide rates vary depending
on service branch, age, sex/gender and other factors. 207 Reducing rates of Veteran
suicide among vulnerable and marginalized Veteran populations is VA's top priority. The
President's Roadmap to Empower Veterans and End a National Tragedy of Suicide
(PREVENTS) takes an all-inclusive, public health approach to suicide prevention. This
roadmap prioritizes suicide reduction research, implementation strategies and
emphasizes the need for program evaluations to ensure better suicide prevention for
Veterans. The Commander John Scott Hannon Veterans Mental Health Care
Improvement Act also expands VA and VHA efforts to prevent Veteran suicide and
improve mental health outcomes. As of July 2021, other related legislation is also
pending. There are several suicide prevention programs and interventions being
evaluated for their effectiveness in the Veteran population.
Efforts to obtain evidence in this area will be ongoing with no firm end date. Rather, each
year VHA will learn more about Veteran risk for suicide, the most effective clinical
interventions to reduce risk and mortality and the best modalities to delivering VHA
206 US Department of Veterans Affairs. 2019 National Veteran Suicide Prevention Annual Report. (2019).
207 Griffith J. Suicide in the Army National Guard: An Empirical Inquiry. Journal of Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior. (2012).
Page 158 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
suicide prevention health care. VA will conduct three studies to build evidence for the
suicide prevention Learning Agenda question.
[Note: Each study described below presents its own sections on existing/required
evidence and evidence gaps, while risks and their mitigation for this part of the Learning
Agenda are common to the focused studies.]
3.1 Caring Letters for Veterans Crisis Line Callers
Sections III and IV: Existing and Required Evidence & Evidence Gaps
Caring Contacts is a proven and effective method of suicide prevention in the civilian
population. 208 This tool, which sends caring, non-demanding digital or physical messages
to individuals at risk of suicidal behavior, was adapted for implementation in the Veteran
population in 2019 for emergency department visits and piloted at one VA facility with
positive feedback.
Caring Letters, the latest Caring Contacts initiative, is underway and expected to have the
largest reach of all Caring Contact implementations yet. All Veterans who call the
Veterans Crisis Line (VCL) are enrolled in this program. They receive nine non-
demanding letters over the course of a year (randomized by signatory-by provider or by
peer), with the aim of testing the effects of this intervention on reducing suicidal
behaviors, including suicide attempts among VCL callers. 209 This large, multi-year
evaluation (FY 2020-24 for most outcomes) assesses the effects of Caring Contacts on
clinical outcomes and VA clinical utilization rates and budget impacts on the healthcare
system using two versions of the letters which is currently an under-researched and -
evaluated area of study. Findings may be extremely beneficial to assisting this at-risk
population.
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
This study evaluates the effects of Caring Letters on care utilization; mental health
outcomes and suicidality of VCL callers; identify facilitators and barriers to program
implementation; and conduct a budget analysis of program costs. Evaluators will
complete baseline analyses using administrative data from the 2 years prior to the
program's launch (2018-2019). Additional data sources include the VCL database
(Medora). Differences in outcomes for pre-post signatory comparisons will be analyzed
with chi-square tests, a Wilcox rank-sum test and logistic regression, zero-inflated
Poisson, or negative binomial models. Analysis for this intervention utilizes the RE-AIM
framework. Current analyses look at letter recipient demographics, including race, gender
and age. Current study timeframe is FY 2020-24 (for most outcomes) but future analyses,
data dependent, will also investigate additional demographics.
3.2 Recovery Engagement and Coordination for Health - Veterans Enhanced
Treatment (REACH VET)
208 Motto, J.A. (1976). Suicide Prevention for High-Risk Persons Who Refuse Treatment. Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 6(4).
209
QUERI - Randomized Evaluation of a Caring Letters Suicide Prevention Campaign. (n.d.)
Page 159 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Sections III & IV: Existing and Required Evidence & Evidence Gaps
In 2017, VA launched the Recovery Engagement and Coordination for Health-Veterans
Enhanced Treatment (REACH VET) and is now used by all VA medical centers. REACH
VET uses predictive modeling and medical records data to identify Veterans who are at
highest statistical risk for suicide in the next month and allows providers and the Veteran
to determine if enhanced care would be effective. 210 REACH VET coordinators and
providers access this information from an electronic dashboard to identify at-risk Veterans
at their facility.
By September 2021, 95% of Veterans will be targeted through REACH VET predictive
modeling algorithms within the VHA system across the four required metrics (Coordinator
Accepted; Provider Accepted; Care Evaluation; Outreach Attempted). The Office of
Mental Health and Suicide Prevention has an ongoing REACH VET effectiveness
evaluation, assessing program effects on outcomes including all-cause mortality, inpatient
psychiatric admissions, outpatient mental health visit days, emergency department visits,
missed appointments and suicide attempts.211
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
A separate multi-year evaluation of REACH VET will assess the implementation process
as well as the initiative's impact on patient outcome. The study objectives include
assessing the implementation process and the initiative's impact on patient outcomes,
using a stepped wedge design and both quantitative and qualitative data. Quantitative
data are collected from Veteran's health records and identify barriers and facilitators
associated with the program. Qualitative data sources consist of site visits and interviews
with implementation facilitators, Suicide Prevention Coordinators, clinical leadership and
health care providers. Analysis follows the Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption,
Implementation and Maintenance (RE-AIM) framework. The study is currently underway,
with possible continuing evaluation efforts in later fiscal years. 212
A significant challenge in suicide prevention is being able to accurately measure how
effective different interventions are. Suicide is a relatively rare event; it can be difficult to
identify meaningful effects when focusing on suicide outcomes alone. It is important to
consider other outcomes, such as care utilization and clinical outcomes, as the evaluation
work described here does. Behavioral differences between various Veteran
subpopulations also complicate the ability to generalize effectiveness to the entire
Veteran population.
210 Richman R. Study evaluates VA program that identifies Vets at highest risk for suicide. VA Research
Currents. (2018).
211 McCarthy JF, Eagan A, Hannemann C, Cooper S, Matarazzo B, Reger M, Landes S, Trafton J,
Schoenbaum M, Katz IR. REACH VET Veterans Affairs Suicide Predictive Modeling Clinical Program:
Evaluation of Effects on Health Care Utilization, Engagement, Safety Planning and Mortality Outcomes.
International Summit on Suicide Research. Miami, Florida. October 2019.
212 McCarthy JF, Eagan A, Hannemann C, Cooper S, Matarazzo B, Reger M, Landes S, Trafton J,
Schoenbaum M, Katz IR. REACH VET Veterans Affairs Suicide Predictive Modeling Clinical Program:
Evaluation of Effects on Health Care Utilization, Engagement, Safety Planning and Mortality Outcomes.
International Summit on Suicide Research. Miami, Florida. October 2019.
Page 160 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VHA Learning Agenda Question 4: Military Environmental Exposure
To what extent have military environmental exposures harmed Veterans during their
period of service harmed Veterans, especially with regard to latent or chronic adverse
health effects?
VHA Learning Agenda Question 5: Military Environmental Exposure
What are the best strategies to implement state of the art evaluation and care models to
provide effective care for Veterans exposed to burn pit smoke and other military-related
airborne hazards?
Alignment to VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Objective 2.4: (Innovative Care) VA will improve understanding of Veteran specific
illnesses and injuries to develop and adopt innovative new treatments that prevent future
illness and enhance Veteran outcomes.
One strategy in the FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan aligns with Learning Agenda questions 4
and 5 and VHA efforts to address military toxic exposure.
Implementing Strategy 2.4. (Military
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Environmental Exposure) "VA and partners
pursue research and implement studies to
Strategy 2.4.5: Military
establish a holistic approach for military toxic
Environmental Exposure
exposure presumption and deliver benefits,
care and services that improves quality of life
for Veterans."
Section II: Background and Context
Over three million U.S. Service members have deployed to Southwest Asia, Uzbekistan,
Djibouti and Afghanistan and surrounding areas since February 24, 1991; many have had
burn pit smoke and other environmental exposures that can lead to poor health
outcomes. There is a growing urgency to address the potential health effects of military
environmental exposures of deployed Veterans more proactively and comprehensively
among the post-9/11 cohort. Because of lessons learned from Veterans harmed from
Agent Orange and various illness associated with service in the Gulf War, VA can
respond with greater agility to these identified threats to the health and well-being of
Veterans.
Sections III & IV: Existing and Required Evidence and the Evidence Gaps
Note: Evaluations on these questions are under development for inclusion in forthcoming
VA Annual Evaluation Plans. Investigators are still developing suitable approaches.
Most VHA facilities currently have neither adequate local specialized expertise nor
structures or processes to address the military exposure-related concerns of deployed
Veterans. VHA's ORD is investigating the associations between military environmental
exposures and long-term health effects; the Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses Research
Advisory Committee has recommended to the VA Secretary a comprehensive clinical
research structure to enhance clinical care delivery and evaluation in this area. Congress
Page 161 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
also mandated the VA/DoD Airborne Hazards and Open Burn Pit Registry (AHOBPR).
AHOBPR exams for burn pit health concerns are a critical tool to assess health and
function among Veterans exposed to burn pit smoke and connect them to necessary
treatment. Over 250,000 individuals have completed the AHOBPR online questionnaire
since 2014 (as of July 2021), yet only 10% of those desiring a clinical evaluation for
military environmental exposure have received one. (For reference, the standardized
evaluation consists of proactive outreach to AHOBPR participants, exams, diagnostic
evaluations and ongoing Veteran-centered care.)
Section V: Plan for Progress and Risks
To address Learning Agenda questions, a complete set of AHOBPR data and the
Corporate Date Warehouse (CDW) data of greatest relevance to research, policy and
clinical operations will be necessary to produce standard reports, facilitate ad hoc reports,
support recruitment for clinical and research projects, create analytic datasets and
establish evaluation activities (e.g., a dashboard). Such data will be essential to
understand granular health concerns and assess best practices in optimizing health and
informing an evidence-based approach as part of a larger quality improvement evaluation.
Identifying a fully representative cohort of Veterans who served in Southwest Asia,
Djibouti and Afghanistan, Uzbekistan and surrounding areas since 1990 and their
exposure status will be essential to conduct successful program and policy evaluation.
The Airborne Hazards Burn Pits Center of Excellence (AHBPCE) at the War Related
Illness and Injury Study Center at VA-New Jersey Health Care System and the Center for
Innovations in Quality, Effectiveness and Safety (IQuESt) at the Michael E. DeBakey VA
Medical Center established the AHBOCE IQuESt Military Exposures Surveillance
(AIMES). Current collaborations support AHOBPR data and analytic needs and the
evaluation and implementation of AHOBPR exams. The AIMES collaboration team will
document best practices gleaned from ten diverse, high performing sites, create a tool kit
for implementing best practices, create and maintain a dashboard of key metrics related
to AHOBPR examination delivery and facilitate the implementation of the best practices at
up to 45 VA medical centers. This work will be done in collaboration with the Health
Outcome Military Exposures (HOME) service, along with other appropriate internal and
external research organizations, to ensure coordination and adherence to VA military
exposure policies and inform policy decisions to ensure optimal evaluation and care for
veterans with airborne hazards concerns.
Section VI: Attestation of Available Resources
These activities are currently resourced for the anticipated evaluations.
Page 162 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix E: FY 2022-28 Capacity Assessment
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
FY 2022-28 Capacity Assessment
Page 163 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Background and Approach
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking (EBP) Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-435, the
"Evidence Act") requires cabinet-level agencies including VA to create and use Learning
Agendas, Annual Evaluation Plans and Capacity Assessments. In guidance documents,
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) specified requirements for these
deliverables.
The Learning Agenda and this Capacity Assessment accompany VA's FY 2022-28
Strategic Plan.
Since the Evidence Act became law in early 2019, the chartered VA Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Working Group (FEBPWG) has superintended efforts to
meet the statutory requirements of the Evidence Act across VA. The FEBPWG has over
190 representatives from the three VA Administrations (Veterans Benefits Administration
(VBA), Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and the National Cemetery Administration
(NCA)) and Staff Offices supporting implementation of the Evidence Act and EBP
principles more generally. Organizations with expertise in evidence-building and
evaluation, such as VHA's Office of Research and Development (ORD) and its Quality
Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), provide critical support to the FEBPWG and
assist other work group member organizations to expand and mature capabilities across
the Department. In turn, the FEBPWG works to advocate on behalf of Veterans issues by
featuring ORD/QUERI's studies in public-facing documents like the Learning Agenda and
to assist in coordinating efforts across VA offices.
Formal sessions occur monthly with overran average of 50 attendees and members meet
informally in groups several times a week to advance EBP efforts across the enterprise.
In addition to the statutorily required deliverables, the FEBPWG has spearheaded the
development, implementation and successful use of formal, documented evidence-based
best practices (such as strength-of-evidence checklists for use by non-expert program
offices) for administrative and policy issues.
Current Evaluation/Evidence-Building and Use Activities
Overview of VA Efforts
VA includes one of the premier evidence-building entities in government: the research,
statistics and evaluation offices of VHA. Although current personnel systems do not
adequately account for them, VHA has thousands of practitioners of program evaluations,
scientific and statistical researchers and clinical experts in quantitative analysis. Many are
in program offices or in the field and others are in dedicated research, statistics and
evaluation organizations. Some are recognized as the world's experts in their fields and a
significant portion of VHA's findings establish new or improved protocols for the health
care of Veterans and all others.
Elsewhere across VA, many offices have very strong representation in the quantitative
sciences. For example, the National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics provides
modeling, forecasting and actuarial information to assist VA policymakers and others in
Page 164 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
making important decisions affecting millions of Veterans. In VHA, separate from its
clinical research, the VA Enrollee Healthcare Projection Model (see this link) has provided
forecasts for healthcare demand by Veterans that are valuable contributors to decisions
about resource allocation, facilities siting and hiring requirements, for VA, commercial and
other governmental decision-makers.
VBA's initial establishment of a permanent capability to conduct evidence-building and
program evaluations is cited. VA does not currently have a single, overarching Office of
Evaluation, but is considering many options to recognize, endorse and enhance
evidence-based policymaking. Currently, VA has a federated approach to evidence-
building and program evaluation that recognizes strengths in a number of areas and is
intended to leverage that knowledge and experience across the enterprise.
Other components of VA welcome the Evidence Act as an opportunity to develop
foundational knowledge and skills of evidence-building as a core capability, rather than as
ad hoc efforts.
VHA Evidence and Evaluation Capacity
As mentioned, VHA researchers, statisticians and evaluators have a well-earned
reputation as thought leaders in health care and have a distinguished history in
contributing both to Veteran well-being and that of all those seeking health services.
Innovations such as daily aspirin regimes and the development of advanced imaging via
CAT scans are famous examples and VHA is still the locus for many significant advances
in health care practices and services.
Components of VHA Capacity:
ORD Health Services Research and Development (HSR&D) Program in VHA as well as
the ORD Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI) are VA's principal sources of
high-quality, independent, peer-reviewed evaluations and also maintain databases of
these evaluations on their website at the HSR&D website. For example, ORD's HSR&D
program, a principal source of research evaluations focused on Veteran care, has over
520 active projects led by over 840 investigators in partnership with over 40 VA national
program offices. QUERI has over 50 centers led by over 200 investigators working with
over 70 national program office leaders.
In addition, HSRD and QUERI use the Government Wide NIH REPORTER system to
also document current research and evaluation projects including high-quality,
independent, peer-reviewed evaluations, which are searchable based on VA funding
agency identity at NIH REPORTER.
The ORD Office of Communications and the HSR&D/QUERI Center for Information
Dissemination and Education Resources (CIDER) are VA's national resource centers for
disseminating and monitoring use of knowledge generated from research and evaluation
activities in VA. CIDER provides regular updates to the VA Chief Medical Officers as well
as the VA National Program office leads through the VHA National Governance Board
and affiliated Councils (quality and Safety, Healthcare Operations) on major impacts
emanating from research and evaluation.
Page 165 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
GAO recently documented ORD and QUERI's impact on the extent to which research,
evaluation and analyses support the needs of the agency: VA Health Care: Efforts to
Prioritize and Translate Research into Clinical Practice. The QUERI 2021-2025 Strategic
Plan documents how QUERI and related ORD funding support the needs of various VA
agencies and programs, how the evaluation and research projects reflect VA and VHA's
priority goals and promote knowledge translation and enhancing the substantial real-world
impact of research to inform Veteran care and overall well-being.
The ORD HSR&D/QUERI CIDER program provides the above mentioned regular
communications to VA Chief Medical Officers as well as regular updates to the Chief
Research and Development Officer and Director. QUERI provides data to the VHA
Governance Board, Healthcare Operations Committee, Strategic Directions Committee
and the Quality Safety and Value Council to ensure research and evaluations inform
organizational learning, ongoing program management, performance management,
strategic management and other measures of accountability. QUERI is the VHA point of
contact for knowledge translation activities for VHA as outlined in the VHA long-range
goals. ORD's programs have several venues in which to elicit input and respond to the
balance between learning, management and accountability, notably through ORD
National Research Advisory Committee (NRAC), QUERI Internal and External Strategic
Group meetings and HSR&D and QUERI monthly calls with VHA and VA leadership
members and other VA stakeholders.
ORD-funded research and evaluation projects undergo rigorous peer review to ensure
independent, high-quality and rigorous research and evaluations. ORD including HSR&D
and QUERI-supported evaluations that use quantitative, qualitative or mixed-methods
evaluations methods. The methods as part of the evaluation submissions undergo
rigorous peer review where the qualitative and quantitative methods proposed for
research and evaluation are scrutinized by Federal Advisory Committee Act- approved
scientific peer review committees. Additional information on this Scientific Merit Review
Process is available at the HSR&D website.
More than 2000 evaluations and evaluative studies conducted by VA each year are done
within VHA, as previously documented herein. Given VHA's expertise in the full lifecycle
of evidence-based policymaking and practices, VA has leveraged their expertise to assist
other components of VA not directly associated with health care. For example, VHA
provided the initial protocol for all VA program offices to self-assess the strength of
evidence used in their justifications for legislative proposals (in FY OK2022) and the
FY2023/4 VA budget request and subject matter experts consulted with other offices to
assist them in strengthening their resource requests through citing evidence.
The quality of data and evidence-building activities in these studies is regarded as high
due to the fact that, as documented above, a series of expert peer reviews occurs to
ensure that studies are well-formed and conducted with objectivity, that data sets are
verified and relevant and that findings are also peer-reviewed. VHA's evidence-building
and other VA studies are typically put into practice as rapidly as possible to impact
Veterans, policies and program activities, so their utility and impact is very high. Even
VHA's basic research is targeted at pivotal issues in healthcare which shape future
practices, approaches and policies. VA, therefore, can state with confidence that VHA
Page 166 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
statistics, evaluation, research and analysis are designed and conducted to demonstrate
rigor in methods, interpretation and appropriate dissemination and that these activities are
free from undue influence.
VBA and Non-VHA Evidence and Evaluation Capacity
VBA conducts operationally focused reviews of operational activities and conducts
evaluations in compliance with statutory and congressional requirements. However, VBA
is only now focusing on developing capacity within its lines of business (LOBs) to
regularly conduct rigorous program evaluations to support evidence-based policymaking
within VA and VBA.
Regarding coverage of this Capacity Assessment of statistics, evaluation, research,
analysis and evidence-building and -use more generally, elsewhere across the vast VA
enterprise reside pockets of strength in technical, scientific, research, statistical and
evaluative sciences and many of them focus on topics of concern in evidence-based
policymaking. However, prior to passage of the Evidence Act, VA had not established
standards and policies for such practitioners working across the VA enterprise, nor
processes to regularly identify major policy questions to be resolved though evidence. As
a result, for example, VA does not possess a single data store comprising all the
evaluation efforts being undertaken and there is no process yet in place to capture such
knowledge and ensure its dissemination and use by other offices (particularly outside
VHA), except on an ad hoc basis. The quality of studies, therefore, varies and VA is
developing approaches to ensure that data is consistently of high-quality and is suitable to
intended purposes. In the current and upcoming resource allocation processes, however,
VA will address these concerns.
In VA's Learning Agenda, the Department demonstrates its firm commitment to advocacy
and action on behalf of underserved, vulnerable and marginalized Veterans in the
selection of appropriate topics for prioritized evidence-building efforts. VA has
championed the interests of such Veterans throughout its history and strongly welcomes
greater focus on matters of diversity, equity and inclusion. Studies have frequently
focused on cohorts that have been historically underrepresented in evidence-building
efforts, such as our homeless Veterans and VA is committed to conducting its evidence-
building in a manner that emphasizes diversity, equity and inclusion both by those
conducting such efforts and the data and findings obtained as the result of those studies.
An important initial success in building awareness of evidence-based policymaking and
implementing its principles, as discussed previously herein and in VA's Evaluation Policy,
has been the VA-wide adoption of the QUERI-originated "strength of evidence checklist."
In consultation with the FEBPWG, QUERI developed a protocol to raise awareness of
EBP and ensure that the disparate organizations under VA approached justifying both
legislative proposals and ultimately, budget submissions, with rigor using a standard
rubric. For the FY 2023 budget formulation process, the FEBPWG developed guidance
used by all VA components requiring the assessment of their budget initiatives with
respect to the strength of evidence in justifications.
Page 167 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Obtaining Insights about Evidence/Statistics/Evaluation/Research
Capacity Across VA
This is VA's first standalone Capacity Assessment document and summarizes the
Department's efforts to obtain evidence-based input and insights along with findings
across the Administrations and for the entire enterprise. This assessment represents the
views of practitioners of data analysis/science, research, statistics and program
evaluations across VA programs obtained through structured interviews and surveys. A
limitation on this assessment is that VA has only just begun to coalesce such practitioners
into a community of practice; they have been heavily concentrated in VHA, as shown
previously herein. The outreach efforts conducted under this assessment obtained views
from most offices across VA where such expertise is located and future updates to this
assessment will provide increasing coverage as VA continues to move toward developing
a distinct community of practice. However, the identification of gaps and strengths, as well
as approaches needed to fill those gaps, have been carefully considered with increasing
convergence as additional practitioners enter the community of practice.
VA's approach to the Evidence Act has been collaborative and inclusive to ensure that
the exceptionally diverse perspectives across the vast VA enterprise are received and
honored. The result has been and will continue to be, that VA's important federated
strengths in significant aspects of evidence-building, -use and evaluation are adopted and
adapted by components with different skill levels, needs and insights.
In March 2020 and again in March 2021, VA's Office of Enterprise Integration (OEI)
worked with VHA's National Center for Organizational Development (NCOD) to develop
and deploy a survey instrument modelled on those used in the GSA-led Customer
Satisfaction Surveys for major agencies. The OEI-NCOD survey was available to the
FEBPWG members, and they were asked to forward the survey link to those who might
consider themselves practitioners of evidence-building, -use and program evaluations.
Submitters were anonymous, but provided demographic information about their
organizational affiliation, length of VA service, grade level, etc., which was used to
confirm the overall representativeness of the responses. The FEBPWG, while considering
the surveys to be convenience samples, believes the results are useful initial indicators of
VA's practitioners' concerns as they have become aware of the requirements of the
Evidence Act and evidence-based policymaking more generally.
Over 400 respondents completed the surveys, a number likely to increase in future years
as more individuals enter the community of practice and as the boundaries for that
community are better defined. The raw data and results were distributed to the FEBPWG
members for analysis, review and discussion. The VA Administrations were asked to
consider the findings for their own organization as part of their component's Capacity
Assessment.
The goals for the surveys were to establish foundational data and to obtain an overall
sense from practitioners of the adequacy of VA's evidence activities from their own
perspectives within the program areas with which they were familiar. Respondents
reflected myriad roles and levels, from SES leaders to field researchers and from the
array of Administrations and Staff Offices, including human resources, financial
Page 168 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
management, data analytics, medical research, program administration, information
technology, healthcare, benefits and others. Addendum A of this document contains more
detailed findings from the surveys.
Both VHA and VBA conducted extensive subsequent analyses using structured
interviews, focus groups and targeted surveys to obtain Administration-specific findings
from their many program areas and to establish the initial framework for a wider
community of practice regarding evidence and evaluation. Typically, practitioners are
involved in several aspects of evidence-building analysis, dissemination and use and the
VA-wide survey instrument, in addition to asking practitioners of research, statistics,
quantitative analysis and other types of evidence increasingly reflects those perspectives.
For example, the 2021 survey instrument was also used to raise awareness of the five
types of program evaluation, based on OMB guidance and definitions and sought
baseline responses regarding participant involvement in these activities. In the future, VA
expects to be able to survey individuals based on the multiple roles they may have, such
as leader/evidence user, manager/evidence builder, manager/evidence user,
analyst/evidence builder, analyst/evidence user, or analyst/evidence disseminator.
This report is based on the results of the surveys and interviews, as well as
Administration-specific interpretations of survey findings and reviews of existing policies
and practices regarding evidence-building and -use for the myriad types of evidence the
FEBPWG reviewed (see list under Capacity Gaps: 2. Evidence Environment Complexity,
below). Submitters from VHA, VBA and other VA components were asked to:
1. Assess current capabilities to carry out evidence-building and -use, as well as
conduct program evaluations in support of agency activities;
2. Identify existing policies and practices concerning formal and ad hoc program
evaluation efforts and other evidence-building and -use activities;
3. Determine gaps based on policy, people, processes and technology considerations
against requirements in the Evidence Act and generally accepted professional
standards for supporting informed decision-making;
4. Propose possible mitigations and solutions to close gaps between current
practices and the desired state; and,
5. Identify issues at the enterprise or field level as well as considerations across all
components of VA.
VA practitioners celebrate initial efforts by OMB to define standards and practices for
program evaluation and believe that as agencies develop and share such evaluations it
will then be possible to mature a set of government-wide preferred practices, such as
specific data-gathering tools and templates, cross agency knowledge management (KM)
and development of maturity models to assess the adequacy of such assessments.
Addenda A through C present detail about the VA enterprise's and the Administrations'
data gathering about evidencelevaluation capacity as well as results of their recent
investigations. Addendum D provides a summary table of VHA evaluations.
Page 169 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Capability Gap Findings
The surveys, interviews and
VA FY 2022-28 Objective
subsequent analyses resulted in the
following key findings
Gaps align to 4.4. (Evidence
based decisions.)
1. Incomplete expectations about using evidence/evaluation for decision-making
(Expectations of Evidence/Evaluation Use),
2. No single evidence/evaluation regime is suitable for all of VA's components due to
their different operational models (Evidence Environment Complexity);
3. Lack of a KM approach and system impairs VA practitioners' sharing resources
and findings with interested parties (KM);
4. Lack of clarity as to knowledge, skills and abilities required by individuals who may
have multiple roles in the generation and use of evidencelevaluations (Training);
5. Challenges in recruiting, hiring, promoting, awarding and performing succession
planning for practitioners of evidencelevaluation activities (Evaluation-Related Job
Series); and
6. Lack of clarity as to the likely resource demands in funding, infrastructure and
qualified personnel needed to adequately implement Evidence Act requirements
(Resources Uncertainty).
VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan Alignment Capability Gap Findings
Many aspects of VA's FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan will drive the use of evidence building
and evaluation activities to improve outcomes for Veterans, their families, caregivers,
survivors and Service members. One stewardship objective and three strategies are
written specifically to address gaps identified in the Capacity Assessment. Implementation
of Objective 4.4 and Strategies 4.4.7, 4.4.9 and 4.4.10 will ensure evidence drives
effective decision-making that results in improved customer outcomes, performance and
the most efficient and effective use of resources.
FY 2022-28 Stewardship Objective 4.4: VA will improve governance, management
practices and evidence-based decisions to ensure quality outcomes and experiences and
efficient use of resources.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation Practitioners) VA will develop a
competent workforce with the knowledge, skills and abilities to perform evidence building
and evaluation activities to generate knowledge for effective decision-making that
efficiently improves outcomes for Veterans.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.7 ensures VA systematically and consistently identifies
practitioners of evidence-based activities, provides training to develop a competent
workforce and resolves resource uncertainty (employees) to address three gaps identified
if the Capacity Assessment:
#4. Training
Page 170 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
#5. Evaluation-Related Job Series
#6. Resources Uncertainty
Implementing Strategy 4.4.9: (Evidence and Evaluation) VA standards, policies and
practices institutionalize expectations for the generation and use of evidence and
evaluation and fully integrate evidence and evaluation activities throughout the
Department.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.9 ensures VA establishes guidelines, policies, tools and rigor
for evidence building that addresses two gaps identified in the Capacity Assessment:
#1. Expectations of Evidence/Evaluation Use
#2. Evidence Environment Complexity
Implementing Strategy 4.4.10: (Knowledge Management) VA's KM system, policies,
standards and practices provide an enterprise-wide solution to leverage information,
insights and research findings for evidence building, evaluation and effective decision-
making.
Implementing Strategy 4.4.10 ensures VA inculcates KM and institutionalizes practices
and systems throughout the Department to address one gap identified in the Capacity
Assessment:
#3. KM System
Capability Gaps
1. Expectations of Evidence/Evaluation Use
Those who generate and use
VA FY 2022-28 Strategy
evidence/evaluations individually commit to
the importance of evidence, but there is a
4.4.9: (Evidence and
Evaluation)
lack of widespread expectations about
evidence.
The Evidence Act, therefore, is timely and valuable for institutionalizing expectations
about the generation and use of evidencelevaluation. While evaluations in several areas,
such as randomized controlled trials in VHA research, do contain formal evaluation plans
as part of their pre-approval requirements, that is often not the case in other forms of
evidence-building and in other areas of effort.
Exacerbating the issue of standardized policies and approaches is that existing agency
practices are still maturing across the Federal government. OMB has issued interpretive
guidance regarding aspects of the Evidence Act and specifically, program evaluations,
but there remains additional opportunity for agencies to share preferred practices as the
Evidence Act continues to shape approaches.
Page 171 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
2. Evidence Environment Complexity
The major components of VA, the
VA FY 2022-28 Strategy
Administrations, follow distinct models
4.4.9: (Evidence and
regarding evidencelevaluation activities and
Evaluation)
those efforts have organically evolved to
meet the unique characteristics of each.
It is a cornerstone principle in VA's implementation of the Evidence Act that no single
evidence or evaluation regime is suitable for all of VA's components due to their different
operational models (this is emblematic of VA's federated approach to implementing the
Evidence Act).
In practice, VA has identified several types of evidence-building activities which provide
valuable findings to guide operations, strategy, policymaking, resource allocation and
business plans. They include, but are not limited to:
Cost/efficiency studies, including cost-benefit analyses;
Business cases;
Program evaluations and reviews;
Randomized, controlled trials;
Statistical models;
Surveys of Veterans, their families, providers, employees, practitioners and
suppliers;
Operational performance measures, including those in Annual Performance Plans,
Agency Priority Goals, & leadership reporting;
Process measures of effectiveness or efficiency;
Policy analyses;
Strategy studies;
Longitudinal studies;
Capacity and requirements assessments;
Outcomes analysis and impact evaluations;
Improper payment studies;
Administrative data;
Multigenerational studies;
Quasi-experimental studies;
Compliance investigations; and
Multiple method studies.
VA excludes from the definition of evidence the following types of discovery and fact-
finding, per the definitions and limits of the Evidence Act:
News coverage;
Employee performance measures;
Patients' test results or Veterans' case files;
Individual Veterans' benefits appeals;
Individual Veteran experiences; and
Non-generalizable process metrics.
Page 172 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
The OEI-NCOD surveys found differences in perception about VA evidence/evaluation
activities based on employees' job titles and levels, indicating further work can be done to
fully integrate evidencelevaluation awareness and activities into VA's missions at all
levels.
VA's extent of evidence, statistics, program evaluation and research capacity is vast even
though it is not centralized. Moreover, the current effort to investigate the entirety of VA's
myriad evidence/evaluation activities is the first time VA has undertaken such an effort
and, as such, VA is beginning the process of developing a complete picture of all such
activities. This review of capabilities presents an initial report of those efforts and the
variety of ways that evidence-building and -use, as well as evaluation, are conducted.
Discussions with VA leaders suggest that evaluation and evidence-building efforts for
existing national priorities and policies are robust. However, those leaders expressed
some concern that their ability to obtain equally robust evidence on prospective policies or
resource allocation decisions is only recently beginning to become available. Due to the
complexity and detail of the investigations conducted across VA organizations, those
investigators' findings sometimes have limited applicability to prospective, new efforts
being decided upon by their leadership cadre. An important example of VA's emerging
capacity building in near-term evidence/evaluation efforts is the rapid response team
approach instituted by VA's Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), whose
efforts are discussed in the following VHA section.
In some other areas, including some programs within VBA, capacity is being aggressively
added to augment evidence-building capability while ensuring that the desired end state
of a "culture of evidence" is built on a robust foundation. That process will take time and is
a key priority for VBA and VA leaders.
In the non-clinical service areas of VA, including VBA, NCA and Staff Offices, evidence is
commonly used to conduct day-to-day operations and to engage in service recovery for
instances in which quality errors need to be rapidly addressed. For example, the Veterans
Experience Office (VEO) provides customer survey results to VA Administrations and
Staff Offices and that feedback mechanism guides process improvements for access and
the effective delivery of services.
In discussions with program managers, they express satisfaction that variances from
expected levels of performance in their operations can be discovered and acted upon with
agility. However, many expressed uncertainties whether levels of service, including
timeliness and quality, were established based on direct Veteran feedback, program
evaluations, surveys and other forms of evidence, or were derived from operational staff
and past management decisions. The basis for some operational policies and standards
that are used for important resource and management decisions was not always clear
and it may be desirable to revisit some of these foundational standards to determine
whether they have evolved as Veterans' expectations have changed.
VA lacks a methodology or approach to assist practitioners in selecting which
approach(es) is/are appropriate for various requirements for:
Accuracy/precision
Page 173 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Relevance
Confidence
Repeatability
Significance
Generalizability/applicability
This gap is an opportunity for the VA enterprise to satisfy the desire for clear guidelines,
templates, or a decision-tree tool for selection of appropriate evidence approaches
depending on the issue, its timeliness, the required rigor of the evidence and the
availability of data. VA's initial development of an agency-wide evaluation policy is an
important first step in addressing this gap.
3. Knowledge Management (KM) System
Underlying observations about insufficient
VA FY 2022-28 Strategy
evidencelevaluation or access to potentially
4.4.10: (Knowledge
relevant findings is the fact that none of the
Management)
organizations reviewed possess a KM system or
tool, nor does the VA enterprise level, other than
highly specific tools for individual programs.
In fact, there is no existing mechanism to easily search current research efforts, such as
by keywords, to find specific topics of interest, thus such searches are performed
manually. For topics that span different research entities a manual, general data call is
required. The VA enterprise does maintain and update a data repository for public data
sets submitted by VA researchers at the Open Data Portal which is compliant with the
government's Open Data Policy (OMB M-13-13), but a policy requiring its use is only now
being developed. VA is developing an approach for such a KM system and is likely to
enter a requirements development effort. The FEBPWG is currently discovering existing
efforts across government and the private sector which may provide insights and options
for VA's use.
The lack of a comprehensive solution for KM is a key gap. When and if the volume of
evidence-building and evaluation activities increase, the lack of KM solutions will become
an endemic weakness in VA's capability to build and use evidence unless a suitable
approach is put in place.
4. Training
While foundational training is available on
VA FY 2022-28 Strategy
quantitative analysis and the OMB-GSA series
4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation
on evaluation also provides valuable learning,
Practitioners)
VA has not developed a means to assess
competence levels or gaps for the several
requirements needed.
For example, familiarization training on Evidence Act requirements and approaches has
been developed and deployed by VBA and they have also developed and deployed
training for evidence analysis. Many practitioners expressed a strong desire to benefit
Page 174 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
from all such training and these individual and aggregate requirements will be made
clearer as VA addresses the first two gaps identified above.
5. Evaluation-Related Job Series
Related to the training gaps and in concert
VA FY 2022-28 Strategy
with VA's participation with OPM in activities to
4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation
establish an evaluation-related job series,
Practitioners)
there is currently the need for a job series for
evaluation.
Fortunately, the Evidence Act directs OPM to address this need. The current lack of such
a series causes hiring organizations to generate inconsistent, ad hoc requirements for
knowledge, skills and abilities (KSAs) when filling positions. For example, VA
organizations provided more than a dozen position descriptions (PDs) to the OPM task
force, since there is no single set of fully appropriate PDs that meet most needs across
VA. Instead, often a host of related certifications and backgrounds are used to signal
competence for evaluation-related jobs. This effect prevents practitioners from marshaling
their talents for career advancement in related quantitative skills positions, from
determining sensible training needs, or from being adequately compensated and
recognized for the depth and breadth of their knowledge and achievements. VA
respondents expressed concern that having to fashion narrow job descriptions without an
overarching professional framework causes them to be at a disadvantage relative to other
public and non-public employers. Also, the lack of standard PDs, either within VA or
suggested by OPM, makes it difficult for VA leaders to know the extent of potential current
gaps in KSAs of our practitioners, difficult to know which gaps to fill or the degree and
consistency of KSAs necessary to reach and sustain our desired "culture of evidence."
6. Resources Uncertainty
Establishing an enduring job series and
VA FY 2022-28 Strategy
possibly realigning positions to it, may require
4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation
shifting FTE resources.
Practitioners)
Additional funding for training will also be required to effectively institute a newly defined
cadre of evaluators and evidence professionals, even if additional hires are not
considered. Valuable evaluations and evidence-building are already constrained in parts
of VA by funding and there is uncertainty as to whether a greater emphasis on formal
evaluation or other types of evidence-building will generate additional resource
requirements.
For example, despite its extensive network of over 50 centers including over 30 partnered
evaluation initiatives to support high-quality, independent, rigorous evaluations for VA
national program offices, QUERI cites funding as the biggest constraint on its evaluation
capacity. On average, QUERI funds 47% of implementation, evaluation and quality
improvement focused applications each cycle. In FY 2021 for example, QUERI needed to
delay launching new implementation and evaluation initiatives addressing key VA
priorities, including suicide prevention and medication surveillance, due to funding
constraints. (QUERI Partnered Evaluation Initiatives typically involve co-funding, which
Page 175 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
has allowed QUERI to support a range of VA Program Office and VISN evaluation needs
with a limited budget, but the co-funding requirement could be an obstacle for potential
partners with fewer resources and funding. During QUERI's 2021-2025 strategic planning
process, which involved gathering feedback from more than 150 stakeholders across VA,
the co-funding requirement was cited as a key challenge in working with QUERI.) As of
this writing, OEI has been granted by OMB two additional evaluator analyst positions
beginning in FY 2022 and VA is grateful for this consideration. However, this constitutes a
small down payment on what will be a major series of investments. VA is using the FY
2023 and subsequent resource allocation processes to propose addressing this gap, but
there are myriad, competing priorities across VA which are often viewed as more urgent
than near-term evidence based activities.
In several areas of the agency's efforts, there is a direct correlation between FTEs and
additional evidence-building, evaluation, statistics and research. In the past, VA programs
dedicated as many resources as possible to supporting Veterans and evaluation was
viewed as less important. That view is changing, but the fact remains that for most
activities there are not funds available for evaluation without reducing support and care
for Veterans. Even in accepting the argument that such evidence/evaluation efforts will
help better direct VA's efforts on behalf of Veterans, those benefits will not accrue in the
near term and redirection of program funds will have to occur in anticipation of a future
benefit to improved program performance. Temporary solutions such as detailees,
cooperative research efforts and external researchers are already widely used, but they
are not sufficient to address this gap.
That tradeoff and the realities of impacts on Veterans will slow VA's capacity to increase
evaluative activities without additional funding. Pending such increases, VA components
are currently examining approaches to enhance evidencelevaluation activities to bridge
the resource gap until economies based on those activities are realized.
Gap Fill Activities
1. Expectations of Evidence/Evaluation Use
Raising awareness of requirements for evidence-building -use and evaluation is the
cornerstone of VA's approach to enhancing EBP efforts. Practitioners are increasingly
familiar with Evidence Act requirements. Members of the FEBPWG will continue to
disseminate information to and implement procedures with the community of practice
while determining preferred practices for doing so. Those who are now actively engaged
in evidence/evaluation efforts are increasingly appreciating their roles and responsibilities
under the Evidence Act.
VA leadership is reinforcing the introduction and use of EBP by sponsoring independent
reviews of the "strength of evidence" in legislative proposals, budget requests and, in the
future, regulatory issuance. A "strength of evidence" checklist and formal scoring protocol
was piloted during 2020 in VHA for both legislative and budget proposals and a similar
approach was used by OEI to evaluate proposals across VA at the enterprise level while
VBA piloted use of the rubric for some of their budget justifications. In 2021, VBA
significantly broadened their use of strength of evidence assessments for their budget
Page 176 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
proposals, while VHA enhanced their use of evidence-based budgeting and evidence-
based prioritization of legislative proposals. For the FY 2023 enterprise legislative
proposal review and internal budget formulation processes, VA leadership is receiving the
scored results of such assessments to assist in decision-making.
Initial feedback from VHA and VBA strongly indicates that the strength of evidence
assessments were powerful aids to program offices in marshalling facts and evidence
they had not previously supposed were relevant outside their routine operations. While
some programs acknowledged that potentially useful evidence for their proposals was
lacking, many others had not previously realized that such information was welcome by
decision-makers. The very significant finding for VA leaders has been that the Evidence
Act and the principles of evidence-based policymaking, more generally, are frequently
welcome by program managers as validating and confirming what they had believed or
known but had not persuasively communicated in the past. The use of the strength-of-
evidence assessment is very likely to be an enduring part of administrative processes
across the enterprise and serves to validate its use for broader policy deliberations.
The use of this standardized tool and approach which provide transparency about the
requirements for evidence-based administrative processes is a cornerstone of VA's
implementation of evidence-based management and governance. Practitioners are
enthusiastic that requirements for strong evidence in decision-making are made clear,
issued well in advance of required submissions and that scoring of submissions provides
equitable accountability and a means of continuing to refine submissions. These new
approaches establish strong expectations for and awareness of, evidence-building, -use
and evaluation.
The VHA evaluation experts who originated the "strength of evidence" checklist have
published peer-reviewed articles on this approach to provide further transparency and
sharing of these thought-leading efforts. The strength of evidence checklist is based on
longstanding processes developed with the Evidence Synthesis Program (ESP).
Established in 2007, ESP makes high-quality evidence synthesis available to clinicians,
managers and policymakers as they work to improve the health and healthcare of
Veterans. ESP reports help develop clinical policies informed by evidence; implement
effective services to improve patient outcomes and to support VA clinical practice
guidelines and performance measures; and set the direction for future research to
address gaps in clinical knowledge.
References:
Wilt TJ, Greer N, Duan-Porter W. Assessing the Effectiveness of Complex Interventions
to Meet the Needs of VA Stakeholders: Experience of the Department of Veterans Affairs
Evidence Synthesis Program. Med Care. 2019 Oct;57 Suppl 10 Suppl 3(10 Suppl
3):S278-S285.
Kilbourne AM, Braganza MZ, Bowersox NW, Goodrich DE, Miake-Lye I, Floyd N, Garrido
MM, Frakt AB, Bever CT Jr, Vega R, Ramoni R. Research Lifecycle to Increase the
Substantial Real-world Impact of Research: Accelerating Innovations to Application. Med
Care.
Page 177 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Helfand M, Floyd N, Kilbourne AM. New (and Not so New) Directions in Evidence
Synthesis Methods and Application in a Learning Health Care System. Med Care. 2019
Oct;57 Suppl 10 Suppl 3(10 Suppl 3): S203-S205.
VA is currently completing a policy on evaluation to acknowledge best practices in the
Department and to set baseline expectations for the building and use of evidence
pursuant to M-20-12 and M-21-27. One of the requirements to be addressed is the
principle that the quality and amount of evidence provided should be proportional to the
underlying proposal's potential impact on Veterans.
At the VA Administration level, VBA has issued a memorandum citing the importance of
using evidence in decision-making. VHA is considering governance options related to its
current evidencel/evaluation approaches that can increasingly normalize the generation
and use of evidence.
2. Evidence Environment Complexity
Overall, VA's goal is to normalize the building and use of evidence and evaluations while
continuing to optimize existing areas of strength. Developing and implementing new
policies and practices concerning evidence will accomplish that goal.
VA practitioners recognize that the nature of clinical, operational, research or other
business questions determine the appropriate types of evidence to be gathered. In
concert with OMB efforts, VA and its components will explore repeatable procedures to
ensure that appropriate types of evidence are collected to address questions.
Additionally, clarifying roles and responsibilities for identifying different types of evidence
building and ownership of the questions that require it, will assist VA organizations in
determining which evidence to obtain under specific circumstances and requirements.
VA's goal is to develop tools and processes to help practitioners across the agency
determine the types of evidence which best answer policy/program/process questions
and to identify the types of such questions that can be addressed with specific
evidencelevaluation efforts. To facilitate that learning, VA is exploring means to compile
evidence selection experiences that will assist subsequent investigators, such as with a
KM solution (see below). The expectation is that templates with selection criteria will be
developed to target the efforts of analysts depending on the nature of the question and
the purpose of the study.
3. Knowledge Management
Related to the issue of selection of evidence types and approaches is the need to
systematically capture study methodologies, data sets and findings so they can inform
subsequent efforts. While VA often can apply evidence to a particular question that
caused the evidence to be obtained, such as with focused organizational performance
indicators, it is less common that data sets and findings reliably inform related and follow-
on studies. Currently, such KM occurs narrowly due to individual efforts and localized
databases.
As part of the 2021 capability survey to VA practitioners, a special section was included
on KM, since free-text comments from the 2020 instrument indicated KM as the most-
cited area of concern. The questions asked respondents to identify which aspects of KM
Page 178 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
were of most concern and most needed, including discovery of findings, contextualization
of findings, organization of knowledge, search and the application of such knowledge for
use in further knowledge creation or its application to decisions and policymaking. Nearly
all respondents indicated that all aspects of KM were of concern and important.
KM will not develop solely due to introduction of a policy about it. Rather, spiral
development of KM tools and their use will cause policy to be initiated that will encourage
further development of tools and their use. Such spiral development will occur over time.
There are many visualization tools in use across VA that highlight data sets of many types
and present analyses and views for those who may not have initially contributed them.
Those tools which demonstrate repeated access may serve as the initial prototypes to
meet enterprise expectations, but it is likely that more robust platforms and solutions will
need to be implemented to support the variety of uses demanded by practitioners.
As part of the movement toward an enterprise KM solution, the current approach of
concentrating quantitative skills and associated data in specific offices should be
reconsidered. The Office of the Chief Data Officer will help guide this effort. Foundational
skills and data sets should be widely shared, with sharing among practitioners being
facilitated and recognized as a meaningful professional contribution.
4. Training
Skills training on a variety of types of analysis and their associated data sets is needed for
practitioners at all levels, with more basic instruction for those seeking to broaden and
deepen their analytical skills. Applied training for all practitioners on compliance with
requirements of the Evidence Act and EBP will also raise awareness of emerging
requirements and facilitate the clarification of roles and responsibilities for
evidencelevaluation.
With respect to "hard" skills development in quantitative analysis and modeling,
commercially available courses are either highly specialized at an advanced level, or they
are broad survey courses not targeted at addressing evidence-building, -use and
evaluation as envisioned by the Evidence Act. Over time such targeted training is likely to
emerge, but VA practitioners at all levels will need applied training either in concert with
other agencies or developed internally. VA practitioners are thought to number well over
1,000, so developing a set of training requirements and obtaining required training for
them will cost time, opportunity and money.
VA is undertaking an effort to identify the requirements sets for training for individuals
based on their roles and activities, but this will take some time and will need to be linked
with OPM's efforts as they determine competencies associated with the forthcoming
evaluator job series.
As stated, familiarization training on Evidence Act requirements and approaches has
been developed and deployed by VBA, and they have also developed and deployed
training for evidence analysis, but the effort is new, and its sufficiency and effectiveness
has yet to be determined. In VHA, the Center for Evaluation and Implementation
Research facilitates mentorship efforts, but only to a limited extent. Organizations like
Data Governance and Analytics (DGA) in OEI, as well as research and some program
offices within VHA, do have software tools, but the OEI-NCOD survey free text responses
Page 179 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
indicated that needs for advanced software still need to be fully inventoried and
addressed.
Many analysts indicated their primary tool for statistical analysis is Microsoft (MS) Excel
and expert practitioners' expressed frustration with the difficulty in obtaining licensed
access to advanced tools such as SPSS, QuantaSTAT or those from SAS Institute. Some
others reported using Tableau for its interfaces. Part of the expansion of skills will need to
be training on suitable statistical and analysis tools, as well as providing access to
licenses for them.
Based on the findings of the FEBPWG, desired training solutions should demonstrate the
following qualities:
Stratification-Separate tracks and tiers for basic, journeyman and expert levels
should be offered with suitable certification for each.
Role-based-Building evidence, analyzing it, disseminating it and using it to
manage or make policy choices should each have their own modules suitable to
the role of the individual.
Sponsorship/funding-Basic-level training should be funded centrally, or free
courses could be used while journeyman-leve training could be jointly funded.
Expert training should be sponsored by the program office or Administration.
Experience-based and applied-Use examples encountered within VA whenever
possible, particularly in a case study approach.
VA plans to undertake a more in-depth review of the adequacy of current training
solutions and associated quantitative tools to ensure that training and tools are distributed
where needed, or whether additional tools need to be obtained.
5. Evaluator Job Series
VA practitioners are eager to have OPM provide a new job series for evaluation and some
key VA practitioners with extensive backgrounds currently serve on OPM focus groups
and other working groups. A standard job series for evaluators will help distinguish them
from statisticians or policy analysts (two job series which already exist), simplifying
recruitment, retention, recognition, promotion and awards. Individual offices now issue
specialized requirements and position descriptions that tend to discourage movement
among opportunities and "lock in" talent to specific tracks. In addition, having several
established job series in evidence-based disciplines will facilitate effective balance among
them and effective placement and positioning relative to other analytical skillsets.
VA hiring officials expect to make extensive use of suitable, standardized position
descriptions and job series grades and have expressed a hope to be able to transition
current employees to them. At the same time, these officials recognize that Evidence Act
requirements across government will cause a "rush" on existing talent pools of already
scarce, qualified applicants while sufficient skills enhancement training (see previously
herein) may lag. Despite these concerns they express a preference for the
standardization which they expect will benefit VA activities both in the short run and
longer term.
Page 180 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA is considering possible operational models which involve a mix of centralized
expertise in evaluation and quantitative analysis along with deployed assets with topical
or programmatic expertise, since familiarity with a practice's disciplines and practices is
frequently a prerequisite for use of quantitative and evaluative skillsets.
A significant benefit of establishing an appropriate job series with grade distinctions
regarding skills is that those skills can be targeted for improvement through training and
broadening experiences. Current VA efforts pending the issuance of the job series involve
obtaining a clearer picture of how quantitative/evaluative/technical expertise is distributed
and what gaps in skills and tools need to be filled and with what urgency.
6. Resources Uncertainty
The first two gap fill activities mentioned previously herein do not require significant, new
resources. However, without the next three gap filling activities related to knowledge
management, training and the impacts of a new job series, such foundational work will be
hollow. While the path forward cannot be defined with full clarity for any large agency,
what is very clear is that having policies and procedures without the tools, training and
personnel to carry them out is futile. As VA continues to refine its required capabilities and
the gaps to them, the full scope of requirements will become clearer.
The articulation of those requirements will also consider the increase in overall demand
and supply of evidence-building, -use and evaluation, all of which will come with
additional costs.
Several of the gap fill approaches discussed below will require the use of new resources.
To fully investigate the Learning Agenda's topics and to build the capabilities and
capacities indicated above, is beyond the current scope of the VA services budget.
VA can, however, attest that its currently planned evaluations for the identified Learning
Agenda questions are adequately resourced based on existing plans and proposals.
Certain aspects of those evaluations, particularly in VBA, will be carried out with external
assistance, typically from contracted services, but VBA has provided for knowledge
transfer to occur for their practitioners to rapidly build skills for future, independent efforts.
In addition, OMB has provided VBA additional positions to focus on equity aspects of
evaluations.
To address the full implications of VA's Learning Agenda focused on vulnerable, at-risk,
underserved and marginalized Veterans and to fill the resource gaps identified below,
approaches are addressed through the FY 2023 and subsequent budget submissions.
This report concludes with a summary of capability assessment results and findings in
Table 1. Addenda provide supplementary detail.
Page 181 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Table 1: Capability Assessment Summary Results
Capability
Gap(s)
Gap Fill Approaches
Area
Expectations
Lack of awareness of need
Establish policies and
for evidence
associated expectations
Lack of policies on
Leaders use EBP approaches
evaluation at VA and
through "Strength of Evidence"
Administration levels
reviews
Assess progress and adjust
policies and processes as
needed
Evidence
Localized development of
Provide greater
Types
evidence and skills
awareness/sharing of
Lack of tool/knowledge to
investigational approaches
guide choice of evidence
Develop decision-tree tool to
type
assist selecting evidence type
Inconsistent suitability of
by requestors of findings and
evaluation approach to
builders of evidence
decision requirements
Knowledge
Lack of centralized
Create requirements for spiral
Management
approach or repository to
development of processes and
access evaluation plans,
automated enterprise-level tools
data sets and findings
Obtain KM services/tools to
address requirements
Training
Lack of consistent role-
Establish requirements for a
based skills training
comprehensive skills approach
Unclear if current training is
Obtain or develop required
duplicative and too costly
training
Lack of understanding about
Create a portfolio of applied
suitability of different
case-studies relevant to VA
evidence/ evaluation
approaches
Page 182 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Capability
Gap(s)
Gap Fill Approaches
Area
Job
Lack of consistent position
Continue to support and adopt,
Series/Skills
descriptions leads to
government-wide job series
inefficient hiring and
Determine program
advancement
requirements for job series
Lack of consistent grade
Establish clear criteria for
requirements causes
existing and new employees
inconsistent KSAs and
regarding advancement
career "lock in"
Resources
New KM tools require
Create requirements for new
resources
areas of effort addressing tools,
New training requires
skills and anticipated workload
resources
in short-, medium- and long-
Greater demand for
terms
evidencelevaluation efforts
requires additional training
or reduction in duties
Addenda to Appendix E: Capacity Assessment Detail
Addendum A: VA Department-wide
At present, VA does not have a single organization tasked with program evaluations and
similar reviews, notwithstanding OEl's enterprise statistical capabilities residing in the
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics (https://www.va.gov/vetdata). Such
Outside of VHA, evaluations and similar studies are typically undertaken on an as-needed
basis and as directed in legislation or laws, across a wide array of offices, only some of
which have fully trained analysts. VA's initial development of an agency-wide policy on
evaluation is the first step in (1) identifying standard and needed practices, (2) specifying
requirements for evaluation and non-evaluation evidence-building and (3) building such
capacity in all areas of evidence, including evaluation, statistics, research and quantitative
analysis. However, VHA is widely regarded as a thought leader in health care research,
statistics and evaluation and that Administration is providing significant expertise, advice
and effort to the greater VA enterprise to accomplish those goals. Through this
assessment process, in concert with FY 2023 and subsequent budget requests, VA will
build significant capacity outside of VHA and to enhance VHA's already robust capability.
To raise awareness of the Evidence Act and EBP and to obtain foundational information
about their experiences from evidence practitioners (including those identified by the
FEBPWG members as actively working in research, statistics, data management,
evaluation and analysis) throughout VA, OEI conducted convenience surveys in 2020 and
2021 to obtain their views. Results and characterization of the respondents' self-
identification are presented below.
Page 183 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA does not possess a single list of those individuals or offices involved in every aspect
of evidence-building and use, but part of the gap-fill efforts is to develop such an
identifiable community of practice. For the 2020 and 2021 awareness and discovery
surveys the members of the FEBPWG, representing the array of programmatic offices,
Administrations and Staff Offices with equities in the Evidence Act implementation and
deliverables, identified respondents. Based on the array of organizations represented in
the responses and their grade levels, VA believes the current survey is a good start for
obtaining a clear picture of VA's status with respect to evidence, evaluation, research and
statistics.
The VA-wide OEI-NCOD surveys contained more than two dozen questions with
responses using a 5-point Likert scale (from "strongly agree" =5 to "strongly disagree" =1)
pertaining to questions spanning aspects of evidence-building and use of statistics,
research and evaluation. A special emphasis was placed on questions regarding the five
types of program evaluation identified by OMB in their then-new guidance to help raise
awareness of those required activities and to obtain insights as to the current state and
prospects for them across VA. Demographic data regarding organizational affiliation,
tenure, grade and primary evidence-related role of the 400+ respondents were collected
in the survey instruments and relevant interpretations are included below. A series of free-
text responses were available for each section of the survey. Additional information
defining evidence activities and evaluation contained in OMB guidance was available to
respondents. (Raw data was previously provided to the Evidence Team at OMB.)
The surveys asked respondents to address all aspects of evidence-building and use,
including their research, statistical and analytical work. In addition, for the 2021 survey,
respondents also were asked to what extent, if any, they participated in any aspect of the
five types of program evaluation identified by M-20-12 and those definitions and examples
were shared with respondents both to raise awareness and solicit responses.
The 2021 survey had responses from 21 SES and 46 GS-15 staff members, representing
a 40 percent increase for that leadership cohort. The FEBPWG were encouraged that in a
single year of effort there was such a substantial increase in those leaders who
completed the survey, hence, awareness of the importance of evidence-based
policymaking.
Notable questions' results are shown in the following tables with associated commentary
(Score max. = 5).
Table 1a: Knowledge of Benefits of Evaluation
Q: "Staff in the organization have high levels of knowledge about benefits of
evaluation" Score (max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.40
3.43
Up 1%
VBA
3.74
3.43
Down 8%
VHA
3.52
3.76
Up 7%
OVERALL
3.63
3.60
Down 1%
Page 184 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
The FEBPWG members reviewing this result agree that while VA practitioners have some
awareness of the benefits of evaluation, more work needs to be done to go beyond mere
compliance toward acceptance of evaluation (and other forms of evidence, based on
other questions' responses) as routinely beneficial. Such efforts are reflected in the gap
fill efforts for "Expectations,' above.
Table 1b: Development of Evaluation Plans (considered synonymous to research plans
as distinct from the format in VA's formal Annual Evaluation Plans)
Q: "My organization has developed a quality evaluation plan" Score (max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.68
3.52
Down 4%
VBA
3.88
3.69
Down 5%
VHA
3.73
4.02
Up 8%
OVERALL
3.79
3.82
Up 1%
The FEBPWG members reviewing this result agree that the low level of agreement by
VACO/Other respondents that their organization has developed a quality evaluation plan
is an area of concern. Reviewers note that some staff offices, such as the Office of
Management (OM) or OEI, typically review evaluation plans, processes and results and
may assist program offices in developing evaluation plans, but less frequently are the
primary office of responsibility for developing such plans. Reviewers are encouraged that
VHA agreement exceeded a 4.00 score - one of the few such examples on the 5-point
Likert scale across the survey. Efforts to increase agreement are reflected in the gap fill
efforts for "Expectations," above.
Table 1c: Effective outcome evaluations
Q: "My organization has participated in effective outcome evaluation" Score (max.
= 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.75
3.50
Down 7%
VBA
3.78
3.90
Up 3%
VHA
3.76
4.08
Up 9%
OVERALL
3.75
3.89
Up 4%
The interpretation of "effective" was left open to respondents The interpretation of
"effective" was left open to respondents to obtain sentiment views rather than assessment
of formal effectiveness criteria (which do not yet exist). FEBPWG members reviewing this
result agreed the low score for VACO/Other organizations, especially in 2021, are of
concern. The result confirms the result seen in Table 1b and reflect, in part, the fact that
Staff Offices, such as Human Resources and Administration (HR&A), which have not
historically focused on evaluation as a form of evidence have greater relative
representation among survey participants. Nonetheless, the FEBPWG reviewers agree
that efforts to broaden awareness and acceptance of formal program evaluations are
well-founded. In contrast, VHA's strong 2021 response suggests that VA's thought-
leading organization for research, statistics and evaluation is deepening their staff
Page 185 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
members' awareness of and participation in, evaluation efforts. Nonetheless, this survey
question targeted current perception, rather than asking for assessment of the application
of formally defined criteria, making the results noncomparable across cohorts but
interesting for revealing changes over time in sentiment based on awareness of EBP and
Evidence Act activities.
Table 1d: Use of Evidence for Resource Allocation
Q: "My organization effectively uses data to make decisions re: resources
allocation" Score (max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.44
3.48
Up 1%
VBA
3.85
3.83
Down 1%
VHA
3.44
3.67
Up 7%
OVERALL
3.69
3.67
Down 1%
The FEBPWG members reviewing this result agree there is room for improvement in the
agreement of respondents that evidence is used in their organization's resource
decisions. The members agree that VA's introduction of the use of an evidence checklist
and outline for agency budget submissions will likely improve this result and it will be used
diagnostically to determine where and how else efforts need to be made to improve the
use of data in organizational resource decisions.
Table 1e: Leadership use of program evaluation results
Q: "{Senior)* Leaders in my organization use the results of program evaluation"
Score (max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.91
3.45
Down 12%
VBA
3.82
3.94
Up 2%
VHA
3.88
4.02
Up 4%
OVERALL
3.85
3.87
Up 1%
The FEBPWG members reviewing this result agreed that again, as in the previous
question (above), the result is bifurcated between VACO/Other and VBA/VHA
respondents, with VBA/VHA respondents reflecting the greater awareness and use of
program evaluation in that Administration. Reviewers agreed that the immaturity of
knowledge management solutions and the lack of tools to assist leaders and managers
identify appropriate evidence types suitable to the questions they have both contribute to
the low score for VACO/Other leadership use of program evaluation results. Planned gap-
fill activities should ameliorate this result, although measured improvements are likely to
occur over the six-year course of this assessment.
Page 186 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Table 1f: External use of evidence
Q: "Other organizations use the evidence that my organization generates" Score
(max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
--
3.83
--
VBA
--
3.92
--
VHA
--
4.32
--
OVERALL
--
4.11
--
The FEBPWG members reviewing last year's survey indicated that many of the benefits
of VA organizations evidence generation accrued outside the originating entity. The 2021
survey, therefore, obtained baseline information to capture perceptions of such data
sharing. For VHA, knowledge is frequently generated at the field level and is
disseminated, such as with improvements to medical practices, elsewhere in VHA and
often to the health care community at large. For the VACO/Other offices, by contrast,
evidence tends to move up or down the chain of command, frequently exiting the
organization which generated it.
Table 1g: Program evaluations lead to better outcomes
Q: "Conducting program evaluations has resulted in better program outcomes"
Score (max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.75
3.78
Up 1%
VBA
3.81
3.94
Up 3%
VHA
3.67
4.18
Up 14%
OVERALL
3.78
4.02
Up 6%
The statement was intended to reveal sentiment regarding program evaluations generally
rather than such efforts currently underway (or not) within the cohorts. The FEBPWG
members reviewing this result agree that respondents tended to concur that program
evaluations are effective in contributing to improved program outcomes. In 2020, the VHA
score may reflect areas of frustration with the transparency of how some program
evaluation findings were disseminated by the Administration. The FEBPWG members
and particularly VHA members, agreed that the 2021 relatively higher score on this
question are likely to persist as the working group continues to raise awareness of EBP
activities. In this area, again, investments in knowledge management tools, as well as
training, are likely to see these results continue to improve.
Table 1h: Sufficient resources for evaluation and evidence-building
Q: "My organization dedicates sufficient resources for evaluation (and evidence-
building) [" and evidence building" was added to this question in 2021] Score
(max. = 5).
Page 187 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
3.09
2.75
Down 11%
VBA
3.54
3.21
Down 9%
VHA
3.38
3.49
Up 3%
OVERALL
3.40
3.25
Down 4%
The FEBPWG members reviewing this result agreed the 2020 and 2021 versions of the
question accounted for some of the drops in score by VACO/Other and VBA respondents.
Reviewers also believed that in those organizations, as emerging requirements for
evidence/evaluation are made clear, there is an increasing realization that what has been
done in the past may not be sufficient to meet new expectations. In current and future
resource allocation activities, VA will consider how best to support evaluation and
evidence activities.
Table 1i: Increase in likely engagement in evidence/evaluation
Q: "My engagement in evidence and evaluation related activities will increase this
year" Score (max. = 5).
Organization
2020 Score
2021 Score
Percent Change
VACO/Other
4.00
4.04
Up 1%
VBA
3.91
3.89
Down 1%
VHA
3.89
3.91
Up 2%
OVERALL
3.91
3.88
Down 2%
The FEBPWG members reviewing this result agree that practitioners of evidence and
evaluation related activities perceived they will be more engaged soon and that this
optimism is strong and consistent.
In the 2020 survey respondents commented in free text bout what elements they thought
limited their capacity to engage in evidencelevaluation activities and the plurality of
comments focused on the lack of knowledge management (KM) in some form or another.
In the 2021 survey, OEI-NCOD followed up to inquire on what aspects of KM were of
most concern to respondents. Their responses to those focused questions highlighted
that all aspects of KM, from discovery, contextualization, organization, search,
dissemination and use were areas of concern. While some respondents indicated their
organization lacked any KM tools, others indicated that their organization possessed such
tools, but they were lacking in some critical areas which limited their usefulness.
VA's evaluation policy is a first step in what is likely to be a long and complex path toward
such KM solutions. VA seeks additional support through resource allocation processes in
FY 2023 and across the duration of this Capacity Assessment to develop and deploy a
sensible KM approach to facilitate evidence-building -use and evaluation.
Across VA organizations, some of the strongest disagreement in both year's surveys was
that organizations provide regular training on evidence collection protocols. On average,
respondents were also concerned about their organization's dedicating enough resources
for evaluation.
Page 188 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Free-text responses also revealed that practitioners seek more training on
evidencelevaluation methods. In informal discussions, respondents tended to aggregate
in two groups about training: Those whose primary role includes evidence-building and -
use sought refresher training and advanced training to expand their portfolio of knowledge
and skills, while those who conduct evidence-building and -use as an adjunct to their
duties sought more basic tools to facilitate their business analyses.
In all cases, respondents distinguished between applied and general skills, with a clear
desire to obtain greater ability to provide evidence to support decision-making by leaders
and managers. This encouraging result means that targeted investments in skills at the
analyst/researcher/practitioner level could enhance more rigorous use of
evidence/evaluation by decision-makers.
Another theme which was expressed repeatedly in both years' survey responses was the
perception that program evaluation requirements are frequently imposed in law,
congressional report language, or direct communications, but are almost always
unfunded efforts not already accounted for in established resource amounts. Concern
was expressed both about the independence of such reviews and their quality. As stated
earlier, VA lacks an overarching capacity to set and enforce standards for evaluation but
hopes that the current and future resource cycles will support establishment of a robust,
agency-spanning authority for oversight and tracking of rigorously conducted evidence-
building an evaluation.
A related concern expressed was that there tends to be lack of acceptance of "other
peoples" evaluations, especially in the absence of shared standards or the possibility of
duplication/overlap of efforts.
Respondents recognize that a generic analytic framework to determine the best fit of
evidence for issues is not realistic, but they seek adequate, applied training, as well as
templates/tools to assist them in working through such issues. Other practitioners
mentioned that the distinction between evidence types is often not clear. Not infrequently,
leaders are placed in the position of asking fact-based questions, but the respondent
does not have the precise information needed to answer the query. In such cases, other,
related evidence must be used to interpolate responses, leading to frustration by both the
inquisitor and respondent. Developing and using a more robust taxonomy of evidence-
types and associated tools to assist in the selection of appropriate evidence types and the
means to manage such knowledge are capacity gaps which are being addressed both by
policy development and resource requests.
Page 189 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Addendum B: Veterans Benefits Administration
In addition to the challenges highlighted by
VA, VBA identified significant challenges in its
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
capacity, particularly in program evaluation.
4.4.7: (Evidence/Evaluation
VBA does not possess a standalone program
Practitioners)
evaluation capability that can provide expertise
to assess the quality, rigor and other key
4.4.9: (Evidence and Evaluation)
factors associated with program evaluation
and other evidence-building types.
VBA's primary focus has been on the operational aspects of claims processing and
providing benefits as prescribed by legislation. However, VBA has identified opportunities
to better understand program effectiveness.
While VBA acknowledges its challenges in conducting rigorous program evaluation, it
also expresses that some of the proposed Learning Agenda topics, such as the
development of outcome metrics for the GI Bill, will lend themselves to increasing the
frequency and robustness of outcome-based and/or impact evaluations. In addition, some
Learning Agenda questions, such as the development of implementation actions leading
to establishing the Veterans Affairs Life Insurance Program, plan to conduct process
evaluations related to the effectiveness of their implementation in subsequent years.
VBA has made several additional strides to address this capacity gap. In part to help
more clearly define the purpose of evaluation and evidence-building, senior VBA
leadership issued a memorandum to confirm support and direction for evidence-building
activities. Training courses were developed in-house to provide awareness and more
specifically applied training on scanning the data environment to support program
assessment needs as well as developing and utilizing evidence in decision-making. The
courses (offered by the Office of Strategic Support and Initiatives (OSSI) and presented to
VBA in both live offerings as well as on-demand sessions via VA Talent Management
System (TMS)) are framed around a general overview ("Foundation") of "What is
evidence," and how it is distinguished from data, a course focused on developing the right
questions ("Evidence training for decision-makers) and a course focused on designing
studies ("Evidence training for analysts"). These courses are available to all VA
employees.
VBA also introduced a scoring rubric and set of criteria to furnish VBA Lines of Business
and Staff Offices (LOB/SO) with a self-assessment of their budgetary narratives. In
addition, VBA instituted an independent review of a subset of proposals and offers
LOB/SOs critical feedback on ways to improve the quality of their submissions.
Under the direction of the Chief of Staff's Office of Strategic Support and Initiatives (OSSI)
office, VBA developed an Integrated Planning Team (IPT) to assess the needs of the
Administration more definitively, including the areas of Evidence-Based Policymaking
(EBP) and Evidence-Based Budgeting (EBB).
The IPT's findings and recommendations, which as of July 2021 are undergoing internal
review, reinforced VBA's survey findings that VBA needs broader availability of statistical
Page 190 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
software packages to support evidence-building VBA currently has staff that can utilize
these statistical software packages; however, there are limitations as current data is
operational focused. In addition, the IPT identified the usage of artificial intelligence to
support free text analysis as another capability gap. Lastly, as a knowledge management
platform where high-quality evidence and datasets could be shared was highlighted. VBA
plans to request resources to address these gaps as part of a general capacity-building
budget proposal, per Appendix D of OMB's FY 23 Budget Guidance Memorandum.
The IPT also identified the need to better understand how to best apply evidence and
evaluation in decision-making, as well as crafting a data Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP) to best harness data across the VA enterprise and link to external data sets that
could aid in assessing VBA programs.
The following table highlights the status of each gap identified in the original Capacity
Assessment and the status of efforts to close the gap:
Table 1: VBA Gap Closure Plan
Gap
Status
Roles,
IPT convened to identify the necessary roles and
responsibilities and
responsibilities; core processes have been drafted in an
processes are not
Evidence-based Activities Concept of Operations (CONOPS).
defined
Evidence-based activities, from a VBA standpoint, include
evidence-based policymaking, evidence-based budgeting, data
transparency, accessibility and standardization and evaluation.
The CONOPS includes these core functions, the respective
processes associated with them, as well as the competencies
associated with carrying out the functions and processes.
Lack of
VBA developed and hosted a series of trainings related to
understanding of
Evidence-Based Policymaking, convened an IPT to elicit the
evidence definitions,
needs of stakeholders and drafted an Evidence-Based
objectives of
Activities Concept of Operations; while VBA has dedicated staff
evidence-based
and contractual resources within its current budget to aid with
policy making and
these activities, it still requires additional capacity to conduct
how to assess
education and stakeholder engagement and aid its LOB/SO
evidence
with question development for the Learning Agenda, evaluation
planning and technical assistance.
To better integrate disparate functions related to Evidence-
based activities, numerous budget and data staff have
attended these trainings, as well as program staff, to better
establish common understanding and promote common
objectives.
VBA developed templates and guidance related to the
development of evaluation plans and Learning Agenda
questions to aid its Lines of Business and Staff Offices with
better understanding with respect to evidence.
Page 191 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Gap Closure Plan:
People
Statistical analysis
While VBA has directed staff and resources to focus on overall
is less developed
capacity building, it lacks the resources to hire/develop staff with
compared to other
a focus on evidence-building and evaluations. VBA is still
evidence building
determining the best course of action to address this staffing gap.
capabilities
Gap Closure Plan:
Technology and Data
Surveys indicated
VBA still requires capacity to develop administrative data
demographic data
requirements and data sets; this will enable VBA to better control
collected related to
for various demographic factors in assessing the effectiveness
Veterans is
and impact of its programs, including equity gaps. Some of these
insufficient
gaps have been addressed within individual Learning Agenda
questions and approaches, but VBA is still in the planning stage
to create a systematic approach to addressing these gaps.
VBA-administered
While VBA does collect some data related to Veteran outcomes
survey indicated
via Congressionally required studies, it requires a systematic
data collected on
assessment of its data gaps across the various Veteran
outcomes-based
populations in its many programs. VBA is still in the planning
information related
stage with respect to these gaps. VBA is still in the planning
to Veterans is
stage with respect to these gaps.
insufficient
Most respondents to
VBA Policy/Program Oversight offices do not widely use VA-
the VBA-
available statistical software for evaluations. Currently VBA does
administered survey
not have staff dedicated full time to performing evaluations. VBA
indicated that MS
staff who perform evaluations are not trained/certified on the use
Excel is their
of statistical applications. VBA is still determining the best course
primary tool for
of action to address this staffing gap.
statistical analysis
Overview of FY 2021 EBA IPT
VBA established an EBA IPT to further refine its capacity needs and how it should
organize evidence-based activities across the Administration. VBA convened
representatives from both its Veteran-facing organizations and its mission support
organizations as part of the IPT. The IPT discussed centralized approach options, as well
as providing detailed feedback and recommendations in the areas of:
Operations/Process, People, Stakeholder Engagement and Tools. IPT members filled out
a detailed questionnaire and worked within four subgroups to analyze inputs and provide
detailed recommendations. Fundamentally, the IPT recognized the need for VBA to
create a dedicated organization that can provide subject-matter expertise in evidence-
building and evaluation, enact governance over evidence-based activities and coordinate
within VA and across the government.
Page 192 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Overview of FY 2020 Survey
VBA conducted a preliminary 48-question fact-based survey over the course of ten days
in May 2020 to support the Capacity Assessment process across all of VA. Because of
time limitations, the survey was administered to specific individuals who possessed a
broader knowledge of evidence-building activities in their respective organizations. The
survey asked specific capability-based questions related to data gathering, the ability to
analyze data and the ability to produce results and use those results in decision-making.
The survey was disseminated to LOBs/SOs and used a snowball sampling approach for
further distribution to employees who work in program data development, or data use in
operations, strategy, resource allocation, or policy planning. This was a convenience
sample and does not have statistical significance since the full cohort was not known. As
such, it is not possible to accurately calculate a response rate for the survey. Sixty-seven
respondents from across VBA completed the survey. Surveys were focused on
understanding organization-wide evidence utilization with respect to the areas of - data
generation and processing, statistical analysis, program evaluation, research and
additional analysis. The gaps identified in the survey formed the basis of the gap closure
plan illustrated in Table 1 VBA Gap Closure Plan.
VBA utilized a survey structure that identified the key aspects of evidence gathering and
utilization, focusing on the availability and analysis of data in developing evidence, as well
as the utilization of evidence in various decision-making processes. As VBA continues to
close gaps, in the future it will administer additional surveys to address the impact of
those efforts and determine additional needed actions.
In VBA, respondents in the LOBs demonstrated a wide dispersion of views about their
own abilities to engage in evidence-based activities. On average, about two-thirds of
respondents believed that VBA leadership has documented processes for using and
evaluating evidence as part of its decision making. In terms of using that evidence to
make decisions, 63% of respondents said that leadership uses evidence in its decision-
making always or usually. However, there was a wide variation of responses across
offices.
VBA concluded in its own review of their Administration's evaluation and evidence
capacity: "At the aggregate level, respondents believed they saw and performed
evidence-building activities, but across VBA and within offices the responses suggest a
lack of solid confidence in their understanding of what these activities entailed."
Respondents expressed confusion as to the purpose and applicability of evaluation and
evidence and they also reflected the tension between accountability/compliance and
supporting improved decisions and learning.
Based on the VBA survey, there are evidence-based processes for strategic planning, but
there is lack of agreement whether there is a documented process for determining the key
research questions that would lead to selecting programs for evaluation; in addition, there
was significant divergence in responses of the extent to which the data and
recommendations related to an evaluation are independently verified.
On average, respondents to VA's survey agreed that they had sufficient evidence
collection systems. Within the VBA survey, most respondents identified Excel as their
Page 193 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
primary source for statistical analysis, with about 10% of respondents also identifying
Tableau as an additional tool. However, in terms of the types of data collected, fewer than
one-third of respondents indicated that they collected demographic or outcome-based
data, while substantial majorities reported that non-evaluative operational data was
actively collected.
Concerningly, no respondents who identified their organization as the acknowledged
experts within VBA for statistical analysis stated that they had access to any specialized
statistical analysis packages, such as those from SPSS, SAS, or Quanta.
VA's OEI-NCOD administered survey provided a number of noteworthy anecdotes
regarding human capacity in evidence building, One VBA respondent captured the
difficulty in obtaining necessary skills: "Our organization is able to recruit either individuals
with VBA specific knowledge or individuals with the technical skills needed for data
collection and reporting. However, we find it difficult to find candidates with both the
technical skills needed and specific program knowledge regarding VBA activities. VBA
would benefit from a program where new data analysts are trained in both VBA
production and operational activities."
Several respondents noted that since job descriptions are currently crafted for specific
organizational needs, training opportunities may be limited outside a narrow area. This
fact impairs employees in obtaining skills-broadening training and results in skilled
employees being "locked in" to their existing roles.
Within the responses to the VBA-administered survey, respondents were asked to assess
what level of expertise they considered their organization to have with various types of
evidence. They identified program evaluation as their strongest capability and statistical
analysis as their weakest capability. There was substantial variation within offices as to
their expertise; respondents believed their organization was either an expert or only
occasionally conducted these activities.
Less than half of respondents indicated that they could hire contractors or obtain
additional staff to complete the work of gathering and analyzing evidence. 100% of all
respondents to the VBA survey identified that they share their data with other offices in
the organization. This result is somewhat consistent with the VA-administered survey that
identified that 80% of the time, VBA shared information about evaluation findings with
stakeholders.
Each LOB who responded to the survey also identified that it used the four major
identified types of evidence listed in OMB's Memorandum 19-23 in decision-making
frequently enough that it emerged as a moderate strength.
As VBA develops its evidence base, the fact that it already has a culture established that
shares information will help bolster a more unified examination of impacts to Veterans
and can help the organization overall develop an evidence-based approach to decision-
making.
Page 194 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Addendum C: Veterans Health Administration
The VA Quality Enhancement Research
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
Initiative (QUERI) and its Partnered
Evidence-based Policy Resource Center
2.4.1 (Innovative Community-
(PEPReC) coordinate VHA's implementation
Based Interventions)
of the Evidence Act. QUERI is
2.4.2: (Innovation, Emerging
administratively housed under VHA's Office
Methods)
of Research and Development, Health
2.5.3: (Enhanced Medical Capacity
Services Research and Development
and Capability)
program.
Each year, their policy analysts conduct structured interviews of major program offices in
VHA that take part in the evaluation and analytics of programs, operations and research.
The offices included are:
Quality Enhancement Research Initiative
Partnered Evidence-based Policy Resource Center
Health Services Research and Development
Office of Reporting, Analytics, Performance, Improvement and Deployment
Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
National Surgery Office
Primary Care Analytics Team
National Center for Patient Safety
Clinical Assessment Reporting and Tracking & Cardiology Program Office [new in
year two]
Product Effectiveness
Geriatrics and Extended Care
Office of Rural Health
War Related Illness and Injury Study Center
Women's Health Services
National Center on Homelessness among Veterans
Office of Veterans Access to Care
Office of Community Care
Healthcare Analysis & Information Group
As this list demonstrates, evidence/evaluation efforts across VHA are widespread with no
single organization directing or coordinating their activities. These activities span clinical
practice areas, patient types, national care delivery programs and analytically focused
organizations.
VHA Evidence/Evaluation Structure
For over 90 years, VHA's Office of Research and Development (ORD) has funded its
clinicians or doctoral-level employees to conduct rigorous research across the translation
Page 195 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
spectrum, from basic biomedical research to rehabilitation, clinical and health services
research. This makes VA one of the only cabinet-level agencies with an in-house program
that generates evidence for clinical and policy use. This aspect led to an increased
demand for evaluation once VA programs and policies were deployed nationally. As a
result, national evaluation centers were established through congressional mandates that,
instead of conducting research, conduct assessments of existing programs or policies to
improve their real-world use in VA.
There are two types of evaluation in VHA: clinically and/or research-focused evaluation
that is used to generate evidence and operations-focused quality improvement evaluation
that focuses on new programs or policies in real-world settings. ORD is one of the primary
sources of evidence generation in VA and its research is funded through a separate
Congressional appropriation. This appropriation is meant to fund activities considered
research, which is generally defined by the U.S. Common Rule as the "systematic
investigation, including research development, testing and evaluation, designed to
develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge" (45 CFR 46).
ORD's Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), whose mission is to accelerate
adoption of evidence into practice, is one of the principal VA programs funded through
VHA clinical administrative dollars that supports national program and policy evaluations
spanning VA that do not fall under the Common Rule definition of research. Given its
funding source and in contrast to the rest of the ORD-funded research program, QUERI
supports non-research, or quality improvement and evaluation activities (e.g., per 5
U.S.C. 311(3)) that seek to inform program or policy improvements. Nonetheless, ORD
and QUERI together identify common research and evaluation priorities, respectively,
based on multiple sources of stakeholder input, including VA national leadership, VHA's
Chief Research and Development Officer, Congress, VSOs and the scientific community.
On occasion, Congress will mandate a research or evaluation priority through legislation
or appropriation.
ORD's primary source of research-funded evidence generation is the Health Services
Research and Development (HSR&D) program that funds VA-employed investigators and
centers across the U.S. to conduct interventions aimed to improve the organization,
financing and delivery of health care to Veterans. HSR&D has supported national
randomized program research evaluations since 2016, focused on opioid management,
suicide prevention, telehealth, geriatric care and medication overuse, among other topics.
QUERI funds centers comprised of investigators and their clinical operations partners to
conduct operations-focused, quality improvement evaluation work at the regional and
national levels. Since 1998, QUERI has deployed and evaluated the uptake, acceptability,
adaptability and sustainment of evidence-based practices pertaining to different health
care conditions and issues affecting Veterans. QUERI addresses questions based on VA
national priorities that not only focus on whether the program works but how it works,
where it works and what it will take to sustain it.
VA leadership realized that evaluation skills, while complementary to research, did not
necessarily exist sufficiently in the current VA research world. To this end, QUERI
established two resource centers (Partnered Evidence-based Policy Resource Center
Page 196 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
[PEPReC] and the Center for Evaluation and implementation Resources [CEIR]) to
provide technical guidance and tools to support evaluation initiatives across the VA.
PEPReC bridges research and operations using data-driven evidence to evaluate and
guide implementation of VHA policies and programs. CEIR provides time-sensitive
consultation and support to VA operational leaders on evaluation and implementation
methods to enable the scale up and spread of policies and clinical practices aligned with
one or more of VA's top priorities.
Table 1 presents VHA's offices whose major responsibilities include evidence/ evaluation
activities, their focus, examples of activities and the documentation examined to make
these determinations. If no formal documentation was available or evaluations conducted,
it
was noted for future examination as appropriate. In addition, most of these studies are
ongoing, continuously leveraged by VHA leadership when making policy decisions.
Table 1: VHA Evidence/Evaluation Efforts
Office
Subject Matter
Selected Evidence-
Documentation (if
Focus
Building Activities
available) Reviewed
Informed by VA
During This
Strategic Priorities
Assessment
Quality
Program evaluation
Spreading Healthcare
Requests for
Enhancement
Women's health
Access, Activities,
Applications, Evaluation
Research
Care coordination
Research and
Toolkits, EBP intake
Initiative
and delivery
Knowledge
forms, Resource Center
Behavioral and
(SHAARK)
charters, consultation
mental health
Durham, NC, Ann
processes, evaluation
Safety and quality of
Arbor, MI and
toolkit and the global
care
Bedford, MA
QUERI RFA intake form.
Evidence-based
Facilitation of the
policymaking
Stepped-Care Model
and Medication
Treatment for Opioid
Use Disorder
Salt Lake City, UT
Page 197 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Office
Subject Matter
Selected Evidence-
Documentation (if
Focus
Building Activities
available) Reviewed
Informed by VA
During This
Strategic Priorities
Assessment
Partnered
Access to care
MISSION 401:
Intake form for
Evidence-
Evidence-based
Identification of
randomized program
based Policy
policymaking
Underserved
evaluations, two project-
Resource
SUD treatment and
Facilities
specific protocol
Center
fraud
Boston, MA
manuscripts, guidelines
Opioids
MISSION 507:
for PI consultations.
Community care
Medical Scribes Pilot
utilization
Boston, MA
management
Stratification Tool for
Opioid Risk Mitigation
(STORM)
Boston, MA
Office
Subject Matter
Selected Evidence-
Documentation (if
Focus
Building Activities
available) Reviewed
Informed by VA
During This Assessment
Strategic Priorities
Health
Telehealth
Conducting research
Does not conduct
Services
Access to care
and other analysis
evaluations.
Research
Specific disease-
activities for
and
related care and
evidence-building,
Development
outcomes
such as Evidence
Health informatics
Synthesis Program
Behavioral and
mental health
Office of
Development of
Participating in
Does not conduct
Reporting,
assessment metrics
evidence collection,
evaluations, no formal
Analytics,
such as hospital-
documentation available.
Performance,
specific quality
Improvement
improvement data
and
(Strategic Analytics
Deployment
for Improvement and
Learning Value
(SAIL)) metrics).
Page 198 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Office
Subject Matter
Selected Evidence-
Documentation (if
Focus
Building Activities
available) Reviewed
Informed by VA
During This
Strategic Priorities
Assessment
Office of
Behavioral and
Implementing Caring
Evaluation protocol:
Mental Health
mental health
Contacts for Suicide
"Randomized program
and Suicide
outcomes
Prevention in Non-
evaluation of the
Prevention
Care coordination
Mental Health
Veterans Health
and delivery
Settings
Administration
Suicide prevention
North Little Rock, AR
Stratification Tool for
Opioids
Examining the
Opioid Risk Mitigation
Effectiveness of an
(STORM): A research
Adaptive
and clinical operations
Implementation
partnership to examine
Intervention to
effectiveness."
Improve Uptake of
the VA Suicide Risk
Identification Strategy
Denver, CO
Randomized
Evaluation of a
Caring Letters
Suicide Prevention
Campaign
Seattle, WA
National
Cost effectiveness
NSO Handbook and
Surgery
Access to surgical
quarterly report
Office (NSO)
care
interpretation
Safety
documents.
Care efficiency
Surgical outcomes
Primary Care
Primary care delivery
Statistical analysis plan,
Analytics
Health outcomes
template for abstracts
Team
Access to care
and budget requests.
Quality and
Patient safety
Reducing VA
National Patient Safety
Patient
Patient safety related
Healthcare-
Handbook, environment
Safety
adverse events
Associated Infections
of care safety checklist
Root cause analysis
through Antibiotic
for mental health units
Stewardship
caring for suicidal
Madison, WI
patients, VA Intranet
site.
Page 199 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Office
Subject Matter
Selected Evidence-
Documentation (if
Focus
Building Activities
available) Reviewed
Informed by VA
During This
Strategic Priorities
Assessment
Clinical
Quality improvement
Protocols/documentation
Assessment
in cardiac
S are confidential.
Reporting
catheterization
and Tracking
Patient safety
& Cardiology
Quality of care
Program
Office
Product
Community care
Benefits Realization
Effectiveness
Qualitative
process, video resource
evaluation
(intranet).
Geriatrics
Geriatric care quality
Intake form, evaluation
and Extended
Access to care
process documentation
Care
Health outcomes
underway.
(Geriatrics &
based on care
Extended
setting
Care Data &
Cost of geriatric care
Analysis
Center)
Office of
Access to care
Evaluation of the
Enterprise-Wide
Rural Health
Health disparities
National
Initiative Evaluation
Telehealth
Implementation of the
Report.
Veteran
VA Diffusion of
transportation
Excellence Initiative
Special populations
on Advance Care
Planning via Group
Visits
Little Rock, AR
Enhancing Veterans'
Access to Care
through Video
Telehealth Tablets
Palo Alto, CA
Hospital Acquired
Pneumonia
Prevention by
Engaging Nurses
Salem, VA
Page 200 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Office
Subject Matter
Selected Evidence-
Documentation (if
Focus
Building Activities
available) Reviewed
Informed by VA
During This
Strategic Priorities
Assessment
War Related
Post-deployment
War Related Illness
No formal
Illness and
health
and Injury Study
documentation.
Injury Study
Veteran education
Center
Center
Provider education
War Related Illness
Burn pits/air hazards
and Injury Study
Telehealth
Center Research
Updates
Women's
Access to health
Health Equity
No formal
Health
care including
Partnered Evaluation
documentation.
Services,
women's health for
on Population Health
Office of
vulnerable,
Enhancement
Health Equity
marginalized and at-
Los Angeles, CA
risk Veteran
populations
Quality of care
Patient safety,
privacy, dignity
National
Homelessness
The Center conducts
Data request form.
Center on
Mental health
a number of
Homelessnes
evidence-building
S among
activities related to
Veterans
the policies within
VBA and other
Federal agencies,
see summary here
Office of
Access to care
No formal
Veterans
Quality of care
documentation.
Access to
Telehealth
Care
Office of
Community care
No formal
Community
Access to care
documentation.
Care
Cost effectiveness
Healthcare
Survey development
Process documents,
Analysis &
protocol documents
Information
under development.
Group
VHA Interview Responses
Responses to VHA's structured interviews were as varied as the activities in which those
many offices engage. A consistent theme was that those entities with broad portfolios of
programs under their purview, or which support a large portfolio of research or evaluation,
Page 201 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
such as ORD, QUERI, PEPReC, Product Effectiveness and Geriatrics and Extended
Care, are resource-constrained in their activities. For example, VHA funds less than half
of those implementation, evaluation and quality improvement applications that have been
independently assessed as "highly qualified," as well as delaying launch of new initiatives
of value that address key VHA priorities.
Several VHA responding organizations noted their activities were well-funded, such as
the Office of Community Care, Office of Veterans Access to Care and Women's Health
Services, but the Service indicated that its reliance on special-purpose funding made it
vulnerable. Other respondents indicated concerns about data access or IT support, but
these responses were specific to circumstances in those entities
A challenging aspect of the resources issue is that many research efforts, especially in
VHA, are not funded by the research appropriation, but by the main VHA medical care
appropriation. This is especially true for studies of clinical practices and programs, since
they are considered applied research directly impacting care. In these cases, VHA seeks
to justify the use of clinical dollars towards applied research versus those dollars being
directly used for clinical care. Nonetheless, some of these programs are funded through
VHA special purpose dollars, under medical services or medical administration
appropriation, which allow quality enhancement activities including evaluation or have
separate Congressional mandates to conduct research, such as the Office of Rural
Health or the Mental Illness Treatment Research and Clinical Centers.
Based on VHA Program Guide 1200.21, VHA
funds both research and non-research
FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan
evidence building activities and evaluations.
2.1.1: (Mental Health and Suicide
QUERI is an educational leader within the VA
Prevention)
assisting program offices in this designation
2.1.3: (Homelessness)
process through cyber seminars, memoranda
2.1.4: (Minority Veterans)
of understanding and other non-research
2.1.5: (Special Emphasis Groups)
designation documentation processes. QUERI
is also funded through medical services dollars
2.1.6: (Women Veterans)
to conduct evaluation of quality enhancement
2.2.3: (Telehealth/Connected Care)
activities to inform VA programs and policies.
2.2.4: (Aging, Frail and End of Life
A key advantage of funding non-research
Veterans of All Ages)
activities is that QUERI can move more rapidly
2.2.5: (Families and Caregivers)
to conduct system-level evaluations of existing
2.3.2: (Health Equity and
programs and policies that do not require
Disparities)
research-specific Institutional Review Board
2.4.1: (Innovative Community-
review. QUERI has also been at the forefront
Based Interventions)
in providing VA-wide technical assistance in
2.4.2: (Innovation, Emerging
differentiating research from non-research
Methods)
(quality improvement evaluation) activities to
2.4.3: (Opioid Use Disorder)
program offices so that their efforts stay
consistent with the funding appropriation (e.g.,
2.4.4: (Military Environmental
clinical dollars) and directly aligned with VA
Exposure)
clinical priorities.
Page 202 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Despite any underlying assumptions that program offices have the capacity and expertise
to conduct formal evaluations and provide associated documentation, it was revealed at
the time of the survey that not all offices do. Any gaps revealed may be addressed in
future iterations of the Capacity Assessment.
Page 203 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Addendum D: Overview of VA Evaluation Activities
VA-wide Evaluation Activities
Each year, VA receives numerous recommendations and requirements to conduct
evaluations from legislation, Congressional requests, Office of Inspector General (OIG)
and Government Accountability Office (GAO) reviews. These evaluations sometimes
arise in processes separate and distinct from our research and Learning Agendas;
however, they serve to build the body of evidence policymakers use to determine future
actions related to Veteran benefits and services. When such requests for studies arise,
they are directed to offices of responsibility with expertise in the subject's area. As an
element of VA's plans to address capability gaps, VA expects to develop an enterprise-
wide capability to track specific efforts in the context of the broader topics they address.
For the present, VHA has a mature approach to identify and prioritize such efforts.
VHA Evaluation Activities
VHA conducts over 2000 evaluations each year, focusing on answering questions that
impact the health and well-being of Veterans. Specifically, most of these evaluations are
conducted through VHA's Office of Research and Development (ORD), which funds
research evaluations across the translational research spectrum, from basic science to
clinical, rehabilitation and health services research, to inform advancements of knowledge
and generation of evidence to improve Veteran's health and well-being. ORD is
administratively managed in four research service areas and several supporting program
offices. VA research is an intramural program; VA investigators who apply for funding
from ORD are located at VA facilities across the country. This makes VA one of the only
cabinet-level agencies with an in-house program that generates evidence for clinical and
policy use. This aspect led to an increased demand for evaluation once VA programs and
policies were deployed nationally. As a result, ORD's Health Services Research and
Development program leads a significant portion of evidence- generating evaluations to
inform programs and policies. In addition, QUERI program has focused on broad national
evaluations of programs and policies identified by VA national leadership or by
Congressional mandate to improve their real-world use in VA.
There are two types of evaluation in VHA: clinically and/or research-focused evaluation
that is used to generate evidence and operations-focused quality improvement evaluation
that focuses on assessing the effectiveness and sustainment of new programs or policies
in real-world settings.
Table 1: Sample of Health Services Research and Development (HSR&D) studies
Study Title
Study End Date
Outpatient Palliative Care and Prescribing Safety and Quality at End-
Jan. 31, 2024
of-Life
Preventing Loss of Independence through Exercise in Community
May 31, 2024
Living Centers (PLIE-CLC)
Page 204 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Study Title
Study End Date
Spanish Online & Telephone Intervention for Caregivers of Veterans
Sept. 30, 2023
with Stroke
The Effect of Screening and Referral for Social Determinants of
Jan. 1, 2024
Health on Veterans' Outcomes
Capturing the Dynamics of Homelessness through Ethnography and
July 31, 2023
Mobile Technology
Clinical care needs and experiences for patients with spinal cord
March 31, 2023
injury identifying as LGBT
Strategies to Reduce Unnecessary Noninvasive Imaging
Sept. 30, 2023
MyPath: A Patient-Centered Web-Based Intervention to Improve
Sept. 30, 2024
Reproductive Planning for Women Veterans
Complementary and Integrative Health for Pain in the VA: A National
March 31, 2024
Demonstration Project (NIH-VA-DOD Joint Initiative)
Risks of Cannabis Use Among Veterans on Long-term Opioid
Nov. 30, 2023
Therapy
Addressing Intimate Partner Violence Among Women Veterans:
April 30. 2023
Evaluating the Impact and Effectiveness of VHA's Response
Home Excellence Research and Outcomes Center to Advance,
Sept. 30, 2023
Redefine and Evaluate Non-Institutional Caregiving (HERO CARE)
Improving Health Care for Women Veterans: Addressing Menopause
May 31, 2023
and Mental Health
Effect of Medication Management at Home Via Pharmacy Home
April 30, 2024
Televisits
Effect of Patient Priorities Care Implementation in Older Veterans
June 30,2025
with Multiple Chronic Conditions
Social and Behavioral Determinants of Health in High-Risk Veterans
Sept. 30, 2025
Improving Outcomes for Emergency Department Patients with
March 31, 2023
Alcohol Problems
Collaborative Specialty Care for Gulf War Illness
May 31, 2024
Long-Term Opioid Therapy: Screen to Evaluate and Treat (Opioid-
August 31, 2024
SET)
Targeting Barriers to Pain Self-Management in Women Veterans:
April 30, 2024
Refinement and Feasibility of a Novel Peer Support Intervention
(Project CONNECT)
Assessing an Initiative to Facilitate Long-Term Financial and Housing
Sept. 30, 2025
Stability in Vulnerable Veterans
Page 205 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Study Title
Study End Date
Evaluating the Use of Peer Specialists to Deliver Cognitive
Jan. 31, 2023
Behavioral Social Skills Training
Racial Bias in a VA Algorithm for High-Risk Veterans
Jan. 31, 2025
Prediction and Prevention of Hypoglycemia in Veterans with Diabetes
Aug. 31, , 2023
Page 206 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix F: Strategic Planning and Risk
Risk Management is the process of making and carrying out decisions that will minimize
the adverse effects of risk on an organization or department. Enterprise Risk
Management (ERM) is a methodology that looks at risk management strategically from
the perspective of the entire department. It is a top-down strategy that aims to identify,
assess and prepare for potential losses, dangers, hazards and other potentials for harm
that may interfere with an organization's operations and objectives and/or lead to losses.
Specifically, in all Federal governments and VA is no exception, risk is unavoidable in
carrying out the Department's missions. Government departments and agencies exist to
deliver services that are in the public interest, especially in areas where the private sector
is either unable or unwilling to do so. This work is surrounded by uncertainty, which poses
threats to success and offers opportunities to increase value to the American people.
While agencies cannot respond to all risks, one of the most salient lessons from past
crises and negative reputational incidents is that public and private sector organizations
both benefit from establishing or reviewing and strengthening their risk management
practices.
ERM is a coordinated activity to direct and control challenges or threats to achieving an
organization's goals and objectives. ERM is an effective Department-wide approach to
addressing the full spectrum of the organization's significant risks by considering the
combined array of risks and opportunities as an interrelated portfolio, rather than
addressing risks only within silos. ERM provides an enterprise-wide, strategically aligned
portfolio view of organizational challenges and opportunities that provide improved insight
to prioritize and manage risks to mission delivery more effectively.
The VA ERM program focuses on enterprise-level operations using industry best
practices and in compliance with the OMB Circular No. A-123, Management's
Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control (revised July 15,
2016).
It is understood that positive, or upside uncertainty, is often considered an opportunity
while negative, or downside uncertainty, is often considered a risk. The general use of the
more common term "risk" or "risks" represents both aspects of uncertainty. To treat these
risks and opportunities, VA's response may include accept, avoid, pursue, reduce or
share.
Accept: No action is taken to respond to the risk based on the insignificance of the
risk; or the risk is knowingly assumed to seize an opportunity.
Avoid: Action is taken to stop the operational process, or the part of the
operational process causing the risk.
Pursue: Action is taken to increase the level of risk taken to optimize performance
without exceeding acceptable risk tolerance.
Reduce: Action is taken to reduce the likelihood or impact of the risk.
Share: Action is taken to transfer or share risks across the organization or with
external parties, such as insuring against losses
Page 207 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
The VA ERM process follows the five-phase ERM lifecycles:
1. Identify Risks phase. Establish the context: understand and articulate the internal
and external environments of the organization; Identify the initial risks: using a
structured and systematic approach to recognizing where the potential for
opportunities or undesired outcomes originate. Continuous risk identification: must
be an iterative process, occur throughout the year to include surveillance of leading
indicators of future risk from internal and external sources.
2. Assess Risks phase. Analyze and evaluate risks: consider the causes, sources,
probability of the risk occurring as well as the potential positive or negative
outcomes.
3. Prioritize Risks. Prioritize: risks based on the results of the rigorous assessments
4. Respond to Risks. Develop alternatives and internal controls: systematically
identify and assess a range of risk response options and internal control measures
with consideration to the risk tolerances of VA. Respond to risk: make decisions
about the best options among several alternatives and then prepare and execute
the selected risk response action.
5. Monitor & Report Risks. Monitor and review: evaluate and monitor performance
to determine if the implemented risk response choices achieved the stated goals
and objectives and sharing the results with senior leadership. Determine risk
closure: establish a process for determining when the risk should be closed and
archived in the Enterprise Risk Register.
The VA ERM governance structure is organized into four tiers with designated
responsibilities. This structure consists of both new and existing groups focused
exclusively on risk in the Department's overall governance structure-creating new
channels for escalating, reviewing and acting on the risks that impact VA performance.
Tier 4 represents the top level of VA governance and is chaired by the Deputy Secretary
who has the authority to allocate resources to address risk response plans. Tier 4 is the
final arbiter of decisions and actions regarding enterprise risks and serves as a conduit for
coordination of mutually beneficial risks and opportunities with other Federal agencies.
Tier 3 is primary represented by VA Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary/Chief Risk
Officer (PDAS/CRO) and OEI Director of Foresight, Strategic Planning & Risk
Management, who ensures the impacts of strategy, performance and risk are considered
in all major decisions. The PDAS/CRO is the principal ERM advisor to the Secretary and
the VAOB and chairs the Enterprise Risk Council.
Tier 2 is primarily represented by the VA ERM Enterprise Risk Council (ERC). The ERC is
chaired by the CRO, or their designee and includes representatives from the VA
Administrations and Staff Offices. The ERC provides a forum to collaborate and integrate
the risk management and internal control efforts of the Administrations and Staff Offices.
The ERC also coordinates with other VA governance bodies to identify and share risk and
internal control information with VA leadership for decision making.
Tier 1 includes the risk functions within the Administrations and Staff Offices and the VA
ERM Working Group. Members are generally non-Executive Risk Owners, Risks
Managers, Risk Champions, Subject Matter Experts, Business Managers and Analysts.
Page 208 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA ERM GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE
a
OMB ERM Executive
Approve Risk Profie
Tier
Steering Committee
VA Operations Board
4
(VAOB)
Approve Risk Response Plans and
Federated CFO Council
Guidance
allocate resources
Resources
Risk Profile
Review and provide guidance on
tier
existing and emerging risks
Chief Risk Officer
3
Approve portfolio of Risk Appetite and
Councils
Committees
Tolerance Statements
Other
Program
Oversight
Applicable
Units
VA Risk Profile Recommendations
VA CFO
lier
Enterprise
Council
2
Risk Council
Risk Response Plans
Risk Appetite and Tolerance Statements
Internal Controls
VA GAO High Risk
List Task Force
Facilitate ERM Program efforts
tier
ERM
Enterprise risks and opportunities
1
Evaluate and manage enterprise risks
Working Group
Response plan updates
Liaise with Entities and Leadership
Risk Appetite & Tolerance Statements
For every goal, objective and strategy set forth by the Secretary in this Strategic Plan, the
VA ERM Program aims to use its 5-phase process and 4-tier governance to identify and
mitigate risks and opportunities across the Department to achieve the best possible
outcomes and results (i.e., accept, avoid, pursue, reduce, or share).
The Office of Enterprise Integration (OEI) leads the VA ERM Program.
Page 209 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix G: Acronym Glossary of Terms
Acronym
Definition
4Ms
Matters, Medication, Mentation, Mobility
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AIAN
American Indian or Alaska Native
AMA
Appeals Modernization Act
AMVETS
American Veterans
ARP
American Rescue Plan
BDP&R
Benefits Delivery Protection and Remediation
Board
Board of Veterans' Appeals
BOM
Business Object Model
C&P
Compensation & Pension
CBOC
Community-Based Outpatient Clinics
CCN
Community Care Network
CC&ICM
Care Coordination and Integrated Case Management
CCPI
Center for Care and Payment Innovation
CDW
Corporate Data Warehouse
CIH
Center for Integrated Healthcare
CLC
Community Living Center
CMS
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
COTS
Commercial Off-The-Shelf
COVER
Creating Options for Veterans Expedited Recovery
COVID
Coronavirus Disease
CRM
Customer Relationship Management (
CTO
Chief Technology Officer
CWT
Compensated Work Therapy
CWV
Center for Women Veterans'
DAV
Disabled American Veterans
DevSecOps
Development, Security and Operations
DGC
Data Governance Council
DHS
Department of Homeland Security
DIC
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation
DMT
Dimethyltryptamine
DoD
Department of Defense
DOL
Department of Labor
EBP
Evidence-based Policymaking
Page 210 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Acronym
Definition
EDU
Education Service
EVB
Entrepreneurship Bootcamp for Veterans
EEO
Equal Employment Opportunity
EHR
Electronic Health Record
EHRM
Electronic Health Record Modernization
Ell
Economic Investment Initiatives
EO
Executive Order
ESP
Evidence Synthesis Program
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FEBPWG
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Working Group
FTE
Full Time Employees
FWA
Fraud, Waste and Abuse
FY
Fiscal Year
GAO
Government Accountability Office
GEC
Geriatrics and Extended Care
GSA
General Services Administration
GWOT
Global War on Terrorism
HAR&D
Health Services Research and Development
HCC
Health Care Center
HHS
Health and Human Services
HR
Human Resource
HRA
Human Resource Administration
HCD
Human Centered Design
HRO
High Reliability Organization
HSR&D
Health Services Research & Development
HUD
Housing and Urban Development
I CARE
Integrity, Commitment, Advocacy, Respect, Excellence
ICU
Intensive Care Unit
I-DEA
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Accessibility
IDES
Integrated Disability Evaluation System
IHS
Indian Health Services
iRMS
integrated Requirements Management System
IT
Information Technology
KM
Knowledge Management
LGBTQ+
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer (+ represents
identities beyond the conventional ones)
Page 211 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Acronym
Definition
LOB
Lines of Business
LSD
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide
MAT
Medication Assisted Treatment
MISSION Act
Maintaining Internal Systems and Strengthening Integrated Outside
Networks Act
MLP
Medical-Legal Partnerships
MOAA
Military Officers Association of America
MST
Military Sexual Trauma
MVA
Minority Veterans of America
NCA
National Cemetery Administration
NCHV
National Coalition for Homeless Veterans
NCOD
National Center for Organizational Development
NCRBO
National Capital Region Benefits Office
NCVAS
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics
NCHAV
National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans
NFS
Nutrition and Food Services
NHOPI
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
NIMH
National Institute of Mental Health
NIH
National Institute of Health
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Now
Suicide Prevention Now initiative
OAA
Office of Academic Affiliations
OALC
Acquisition, Logistics and Construction
OAWP
Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
OCC
Office of Community Care
OEHRM
Office of Electronic Health Record Modernization
OEI
Office of Enterprise Integration
OGC
Office of General Counsel
OHE
Office of Health Equity
OIT
Office of Information and Technology
OIG
Office of Inspector General
OM
Office of Management
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
OMHSP
Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
OPA
Office of Public Affairs
OPM
Office of Personnel Management
Page 212 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Acronym
Definition
ORD
Office of Research and Development
ORH
Office of Rural Health
OSC
Office of Special Counsel
OSDBU
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
OSI
Opioid Safety Initiative
OTED
Outreach, Transition and Economic Development
OUD
Opioid Use Disorder
OVAC
Office for Veterans Access to Care
PCPG
Personalized Career Planning and Guidance
PEPReC
Partnered Evidence-based Policy Resource Center
PL
Public Law
P3
Public Private Partnerships
PSTAP
Post-Separation Transition Assistance Program
PTSD
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
QSPP
Quadrennial Strategic Planning Process
QUERI
Quality Enhancement Research Initiative
REACH VET
Recovery Engagement and Coordination for Health - Veterans
Enhanced Treatment
RE-AIM
Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation and Maintenance
RRTP
Residential Rehabilitation Treatment Programs
SBA
U.S. Small Business Administration
SCIP
Strategic Capital Investment Planning
SCOUTT
Stepped Care for Opioid Use Disorder Train the Trainer
SDOH
Social Determinants of Health
SDVOSB
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses
SECVA
Secretary of VA
SHAARK
Spreading Healthcare Access, Activities, Research and Knowledge
SimLEARN
VHA Simulation Learning, Evaluation, Assessment and Research
Network
SKEPTIC
Social Demographics, Kompetition/Substitution, Economics/Ecology,
Political, Technology, Industry and Customer/Citizen
SP 2.0
Suicide Prevention 2.0 Initiative
SPACE
Strategies for Prescribing Analgesics Comparative Effectiveness
SPED
Safety Planning in Emergency Departments
SPS
Strategic Planning Service
SSA
Social Security Administration
STORM
Stratification Tool for Opioid Risk Mitigation
Page 213 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Acronym
Definition
SUD
Substance Use Disorder
TAP
Transition Assistance Program
TBI
Traumatic Brain Injury
UCC
Urgent Care Centers
U.S.
United States
USDA
U.S. Department of Agriculture
USICH
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness
VA
Department of Veterans Affairs
VADS
Veteran's Assistance Discharge System
VAEB
VA Executive Board
VAOB
VA Operations Board
VACO
VA Central Office
VAMC
VA Medical Center
VASRD
VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities
VASS
VA Solid Start
VBA
Veterans Benefits Administration
VBOC
Veterans Business Outreach Center
VCL
Veterans Crisis Line
VCP
Veteran Community Partnerships
VEO
Veterans Experience Office
VFW
Veterans of Foreign War
VHA
Veterans Health Administration
VHA IE
VHA Innovation Ecosystem
VIEWS
Veterans Integrated Enterprise Workflow Solution
VLM
Veterans Legacy Memorial
VOM
Veteran Object Model
VOSB
Veteran-Ownec Small Businesses
VRRAP
Veteran Rapid Retraining Assistance Program
VR&E
Veteran Readiness and Employment
VSO
Veteran Service Organizations
VSOC
VetSuccess on Campus
WVIF
Women Veterans Interactive Foundation
Page 214 of 235
JOURNEYS OF
This map covers ten life stages any Veteran may encounter, from pre-service to end of life. These life
stages are organized in three phases in which Veterans' goals and aspirations are distinctly different.
VETERANS MAP
Each life stage lists out moments Veterans typically experience and associated VA services, and calls out
key "moments that matter" which may have significant impact on Veterans' experiences.
Objectives:
1.1.1.2
2.1,2.2,2.3
3.1
Reinventing
Objectives:
Objectives:
Myself
Objectives:
Objectives:
1.1, 1.2
1.1,1.2
1.1,1.2
1.1, 1.2
2.1,2.2.2.3.2.4.2.5
2.1,2.2.2.3.2.4.2.5
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1
Joining
Serving
Getting
Starting
Taking Cave
Retiring
Aging
Dying
Out
Up
of Myself
Objectives:
Objectives:
Objectives:
Objectives:
1.1,1.2
1.1,1.2
1.1,1.2
Putting
1.1.1.2
2.1,2.2
2.1,2.2.2.3.2.4.2.5
2.1,2.2.2.3.2.4.2.5
Down
2.1, 2.2.2.3.2.4, 2.5
3.1
3.1
3.1
Roots
3.1
Objectives:
1.1,1.2
2.1,2.2,2.3,
2.4,2.5
3.1
SERVING IN AND SEPARATING FROM THE MILITARY
LIVING CIVILIAN LIFE
RETIRING AND AGING
JOURNEYS OF
This map covers 23 career stages any VA employee may encounter, from searching to staying
connected. These stages are organized in five phases in which each employee's goals and
VA EMPLOYEES MAP
aspirations are distinctly different. Each employment stage lists out moments employees typically
experience and calls out key moments that matter which may have significant impact on
employees' experiences.
Objectives:
2,2.1,2.2,23,31,3.2,41, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4
Objectives:
1.2
2.1,2.2,2.3
3.1,3.2
4.1,4.2,4.3,4.4
Objectives:
Objectives:
1.2
1.2
3.1,3.2
3.1,3.2
4.1,4.2,4.4
4.1,4.3
Objectives:
4.2, 4.3, 4.4
c
for
CONSIDERING AND GETTING IN
STARTING UP
PERFORMING, GROWING, AND ADAPTING
CHANGING ROLES
MOVING ON
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix I: VA FY 2022-28 Strategic Plan Poster
2022 - 2028 VETERANS AFFAIRS STRATEGIC PLAN
SSIONSTATEMENT
VALUES
To fulfill President Lincoln's promise, "To
Integrity, Commitment, Advocacy, Respect, Excellence: VA core
care for him who shall have borne the
values (I-CARE) define who we are and our culture. They serveas a guide in
battle and for his widow and his orphan".
providing care and services to Veterans, their families, and beneficiaries.
The Strategic Plan incorporates the VA Secretary's four fundamental principles to lead and manage VA
in alignment with VA's ICARE Core Values, Characteristics, and Customer Experience Principles:
Advocacy - Access - Outcomes - Excellence
GOAL 1: VA consistently communicates with its customers and partners to assess and maximize
performance, evaluate needs and build long-term relationships and trust.
1.1 (Consistent and Easy to Understand Information) VA and partners use multiple channels and methods to
ensure information about benefits, care and services is clear and easy to understand and access.
1.2 (Lifelong Relationships and Trust) VA listens to Veterans, their families, caregivers, survivors, Service
members, employees and other stakeholders to project future trends, anticipate needs and deliver effective and
agile solutions that improve their outcomes, access and experiences.
GOAL 2: VA delivers timely, accessible, high-quality benefits, care and services to meet the
unique needs of Veterans and all eligible beneficiaries.
2.1 (Underserved, Marginalized and At-Risk Veterans) VA emphasizes the delivery of benefits, care and
services to underserved, marginalized and at-risk Veterans to prevent suicide and homelessness, improve their
economic security, health, resiliency and quality of life and achieve equity.
2.2 (Tailored Delivery of Benefits, Care and Services Ensure Equity and Access) VA and partners will tailor
the delivery of benefits and customize whole health care and services for the recipient at each phase of their life
journey.
2.3 (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Access (IDEA)) VA will enhance understanding of Veteran needs and eliminate
disparities and barriers to health, improve service delivery and opportunities to enhance Veterans' outcomes,
experiences and quality of life.
2.4 (Innovative Care) VA will improve understanding of Veteran specific illnesses and injuries to develop and
adopt innovative new treatments that prevent future illness and enhance Veteran outcomes.
2.5 (Value and Sustainability) VA, with community partners, will deliver integrated care and services, balancing
resources to ensure sustainability while continuing to deliver value and improve health and well-being outcomes of
Veterans.
GOAL 3: VA builds and maintains trust with Stakeholders through proven stewardship,
transparency and accountability.
3.1 (VA is Transparent and Trusted) VA will be the trusted agent for service and advocacy for our Nation's
heroes, caregivers, families, survivors and Service members to improve their quality of life and ensure end of life
dignity.
3.2 (Internal and External Accountability) VA will continue to promote and improve organizational and individual
accountability and ensure a just culture.
GOAL 4: VA ensures governance, systems, data and management best practices improve
experiences, satisfaction, accountability and security.
4.1 (Our Employees Are Our Greatest Asset) VA will transform its human capital management capabilities to
empower a collaborative culture that promotes information sharing, diversity, equity and inclusion and a
competent, high-performing workforce to best serve Veterans and their families.
4.2 (Data is a Strategic Asset) VA will securely manage data as a strategic asset to improve VA's understanding
of customers and partners, drive evidence-based decision-making and deliver more effective and efficient
solutions.
4.3 (Easy Access and Secure Systems) VA will deliver integrated, interoperable, secure and state-of-the-art
systems to improve the delivery of benefits, care and services.
4.4 Evidence Based Decisions VA will improve governance, management practices and make evidence-based
decisions to ensure quality outcomes and experiences and efficient use of resources.
Page 217 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Appendix J: References
111th Congress. 2010. Public Law 111-274-Plain Writing Act of 2010. October 13.
Accessed June 29, 2021. https://www.plainlanguage.gov/lawl
115th Congress. 2021. "Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.
Public Law 115-435." Congress.gov. June. Accessed June 15, 2021.
https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ435/PLAW-115publ435.pdf.
116th Congress (2019-2020). 2020. "Public Law 213. Department of Veterans Affairs
Website Accessibility Act of 2019 - S.3587." Congress.gov December 4. Accessed
January 30, 2021. https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/3587.
2016. "38 CFR § 17.415 - Full practice authority for advanced practice registered nurses."
Federal Register. May 25. Accessed August 11, 2021.
Ittps://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2016-05-25/pdf/2016-12338.pdf.
n.d. "38 U.S. Code § 1720G - Assistance and support services for caregivers." Cornell
University Legal Information Institute. Accessed August 12, 2021.
ttps://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/38/1720G
2006. "38 United States Code § 7308 - Office of Rural Health." Cornell Law School Global
Information Institute. December 22. Accessed May 28, 2021.
Ittps://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/38/7308
2021. About AACN: Who We Are. Accessed March 2, 2021.
https://www.aacnnursing.org/.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 2021 (reviewed). What Is Patient
Experience? https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/about-cahps/patient-
experience/index.html
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. n.d. About AACN. Accessed April 15, 2021.
https://www.aacnnursing.org/.
- 2021. Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education. Accessed March 2, 2021.
https://www.aacnnursing.org/CCNE.
- n.d. Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education. Accessed April 15, 2021.
https://www.aacnnursing.org/CCNE.
American Hospital Association. 2020. "Value Initiative Issue Brief: Team-based Care
Creates Value." American Hospital Association.
https://www.aha.org/system/files/media/file/2020/09/value-initiative-issue-brief-
am-based-care-creates-value.pdf.
Argento, Elena, Kenneth W. Tupper, M. Eugenia Socias. 2019. "The tripping point: The
potential role of psychedelic-assisted therapy in the response to the opioid crisis."
International Journal of Drug Policy 66: 80-81. Accessed November 17, 2021.
doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2018.11.006.
Page 218 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Association of Schools Advancing Health Professionals. 2020. What is Allied Health.
Accessed April 15, 2021. https://www.asahp.org/what-is.
Bokhour, B.G., Hyde, J.K., Mohr, D.C., 2021. Whole Health System of Care Evaluation-A
Progress Report on Outcomes of the WHS Pilot at 18 Flagship Sites. Accessed
November 19, 2021. https://www.va.gov/WHOLEHEALTH/professional-
esources/clinician-tools/Evidence-Based-Research.asp.
Brignone. 2020. "Trends in the Diagnosis of Diseases od Dispair." BMJ Open.
ittps://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/bmjopen/10/10/e037679.full.pdf.
Burek, Gregory. 2018."Military Culture:Working With Veterans." Psychiatry Online.
September 1. https://psychiatryonline.org/doi/pdf/10.1176/appi.ajp-rj.2018.130902.
Carter, Phillip. 2017.Center for a New American Security. June 15.
https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/lost-in-translation.
Castro, Kintzle. 2017. "The State of the American Veteran." USC. https://cir.usc.edu/wp
content/uploads/2017/05/USC-CIR-SF-VET-2017_FINAL-Pgs.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. n.d. Division of Preparedness and Emerging
Infections (DPEI). Accessed March 28, 2021.
https://www.cdc.gov/ncezid/dpei/eip/index.html.
.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. n.d. Value-Based Programs.
ttps://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-
instruments/Value-Based-Programs/Value-Based-Programs.
Congressional Research Service. 2020. "Paving the Way for Value-Based Health Care
."
rsreports.congress.gov.
https:/lcrsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/LSB/LSB10448.
- 2016. "The Congressional Appropriations Process.'
https://www.senate.gov/CRSpubs/8013e37d-4a09-46f0-b1e2-c14915d498a6.pdf.
Department of Health and Human Services. n.d. Social Determinants of Health. Accessed
May 4, 2021. https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/social-
determinants-health.
Department of Homeland Security. 2015. "National Preparedness Goal." Vers. Second
Edition. Department of Homeland Security. September. Accessed November 17,
2021. .https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
lational_preparedness_goal_2nd_edition.pdf
Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2021. U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
 https://www.hud.gov/press/press_releases_media_advisories/hud_no_21_041.
Department of Justice. 2019. "Law Enforcement Officers.' National Institute of
Correctionss in partnership with the Justice-Involved Veterans Network (JIVN.
ps://s3.amazonaws.com/static.nicic.gov/UserShared/033091.pdf.
Page 219 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Department of Labor. n.d. Veterans' Employment & Training Service (VETS).
Ittps://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/veterans.
Department of Veterans Affairs. 2021. "A Message from VA Secretary Denis
McDonough." Vantage Point News Sections: Secretary's Blog. February 9.
Accessed August 31, 2021. https://blogs.va.gov/NAntage/84509/message-va
secretary-denis-mcdonough/.
- n.d. About VA. Accessed May 5, 2021. https://www.va.gov/about_val
- n.d. About VA Programs. Accessed March 27, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/about_va/programs.asp
- n.d. About VA: Organization. Accessed May 11, 2021.
  https://www.va.gov/about_va/organizations.asp.
- n.d. "Advancing Value-Driven Care." Seattle-Denver Center of Innovation (COIN).
Accessed June 10, 2021.
https://www.seattledenvercoin.research.va.gov/research/value_driven_care.asp
Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee.
n.d. "Joint Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2019-2021." Office of the Under Secretary
for Personnel and Readiness. Accessed June 9, 2021.
ttps://prhome.defense.gov/Portals/52/Documents/VA-DoD%20FY%202019-
2021%20JSP%20(signed%20March%2018%202019).pdf.
Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee.
2021. "VA-DOD Joint Data and Analytics Strategy Plan of Action." draft. Accessed
June 8, 2021.
Department of Veterans Affairs. n.d. Center for Integrated Healthcare. Accessed March
11, 2021. https://www.mirecc.va.gov/cih-visn2/.
-
2021. "Climate Action Plan." August. Accessed November 11, 2021.
https://www.sustainability.gov/pdfs/va-2021-cap.pdf
- n.d. Connected Care: Expanding Veteran Access to Care Through Virtual
Technologies. Accessed May 6, 2021. https:/lconnectedcare.va.gov/
- . n.d. COVER Commission. https://www.va.gov/cover/.
- . 2021. Ethics Principles for Access to and Use of Veteran Data. February 4. Accessed
March 3, 2021. https://www.oit.va.gov/about/ethical-data-use/.
- 2021. "FY 2022 Budget Submission: Supplemental Information & Appendices Volume
1 of 4." Office of the Budget. May. Accessed June 7, 2021.
ittps://www.va.gov/budget/docs/summary/fy2022VAbudgetVolumelsupplementalln
formationAndAppendices.pdf#page=17&zoom=100,0,0.
- . n.d. IICARE. Accessed May 19,2021. https://www.va.gov/icare/index.asp.
- . 2021. / CARE. Accessed December 20, 2021.
 https://www.va.gov/ICARE/index.asp#:~:text=%E2%80%9COur%20department%2
Page 220 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Oremains%20fully%20committed%20to%20fulfilling%20the,can%20succeed%20wi
thout%20values%20to%20match%20its%20mission.
- . n.d. / CARE Core Values and Characteristics. Accessed May 28, 2021.
ttps://www.va.gov/icare/core-values.asp.
- . n.d. Journey's of VA Employees Map. Accessed July 27, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/ve/docs/VAEmployeeExperienceJourneyMap.pdf.
- 2020. "Journeys of Veterans Map." VAntage Blogs. February. Accessed June 11,
2021. https://www.blogs.va.gov/VAntage/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Veteran-
Journey-Map.pdf
- n.d. Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center (IMIRECC). Accessed
March 3, 2021. https://www.mirecc.va.gov/cih-visn2l.
- n.d. National Cemetery Administration. Accessed May 21, 2021.
https://www.cem.va.gov/.
- 2018. "National Strategy for Preventing Veteran Suicide 2018-2028."
MentalHealth.gov. Accessed March 5, 2021.
 ttps://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/suicide_prevention/docs/Office-of-Mental-Health-
Id-Suicide-Prevention-National-Strategy-for-Preventing-Veterans-Suicide.pdf
- 2020. "On Memorial Day VA Honors All Of The Survivors of Those Who Have Served
and Died." National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics. May. Accessed
June 4, 2021.
 https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/2020_Memorial_Day_Visualization.pdf
- . n.d. Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI).
https://www.va.gov/painmanagement/opioid_safety_initiative_osi.asp.
-. n.d. Post Traumatic Stress Disorder: National Center for PTSD. Accessed March 3,
2021. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/.
- 2021. "Remarks by Secretary Denis R. McDonough." Office of Public and
Intergovernmental Affairs. May 25. Accessed June 11, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/opa/speeches/2021/05_25_2021.asp.
- 2021. "Strategic Plan 2018-2022 Update.' Office of Inspector General. February 28.
Accessed June 11, 2021. https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VA-OIG-Strategic-Plan-
2018-to-2022-update.pdf.
- 2021. "The National Center for Healthcare Advancement and Partnerships Serves
Veterans Through Partnership.' National Center for Healthcare Advancement and
Partnerships. June 1. Accessed June 15, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/HEALTHPARTNERSHIPS/index.asp.
- n.d. "The Origin of the VA Motto: Lincoln's Second Inaugural Address.' Office of
Public and Intergovernmental Affairs. Accessed June 7, 2021.
  https://www.va.gov/opa/publications/celebrate/vamotto.pdf.
Page 221 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
- . 2021. To Educate for VA and the Nation. January 12. Accessed March 3, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/oaal.
- . 2021. "VA Benefits & Health Care Utilization.' National Center for Veterans Analysis
and Statistics. April 29. Accessed May 21, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/pocketcards/fy2021q3.pdf.
- n.d. "VA History In Brief." Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs. Accessed
June 8, 2021.
)s://www.va.gov/opa/publications/archives/docs/history_in_brief.pdf.
- -.n.d. VA Telehealth: How Telehealth Works. Accessed May 5, 2021.
  https://telehealth.va.gov/how-telehealth-works-va.
- . 2021. "VA's Customer Experience Institute (VACXi)." Veterans Experience Office.
March 23. Accessed June 14, 2021. https://www.va.gov/vel.
- n.d. VA's Mission: Core Values and Characteristics. Accessed May 28, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/icare/core-values.asp.
Department of Veterans Affairs. 2021. VAST Counts and Changes Report. 3: June.
- 2021. "Veteran Community Partnerships." National Center for Healthcare
Advancement and Partnerships. May 11. Accessed 15 2021, June.
https://www.va.gov/healthpartnerships/vcp.asp.
- 2021. Veteran Trust in VA. 04 29. https://www.va.gov/initiatives/veteran-trust-in-val.
- . n.d. Veterans Benefits Administration. Accessed May 13, 2021.
https://benefits.va.gov/benefits/.
- . 2021. Veterans Cemetery Grants Program. June 1. Accessed June 17, 2021.
https://www.cem.va.gov/grants/index.asp.
- . n.d. Veterans Health Administration. Accessed May 20, 2021.
https://www.va.gov/health/.
- . 2020. Veterans Health Administration Compensated Work Therapy. March 3.
Accessed May 9, 2021. https://www.va.gov/health/cwt/.
- 2019. Veterans Legacy Program. November 6. Accessed June 17, 2021.
https://www.cem.va.gov/legacy/index.asp#:~:text=The%20Veterans%20Legacy%2
OProgram%20commemorates,found%20within%20NCA%20national%20cemeterio
S.
- 2021. "Veterans to benefit from personalized career planning and guidance." VAntage
Point. February 9. Accessed February 21, 2021.
ps://blogs.va.gov/VAntage/84397/veterans-benefit-personalized-career-
planning-
lance/?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=&utm_ter
m=&utm_content=.
Department of Veterans Affairs; U.S. Department of Defense. 2019. "VA/DOD Clinical
Practice Guideline: Assessment and Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide."
Page 222 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guidelines. Accessed March 5, 2021.
https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/MH/srbl.
Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee. 2019.
"Annual Joint Report Fiscal Year 2019." Personnel and Readiness. September
30.
Accessed June 23, 2021.
 ttps://prhome.defense.gov/Portals/52/Documents/FY%2019%20AJR%20(Final%2
Signed)%20508%20compliant.pdf.
Derefinko, Karen. 2018. "Substance Use and Psychological Distress Before and After the
Military to Civilian Transition Military Medicine, Volume 183, Issue 5-6, Pages
e258-e265. https:/lacademic.oup.com/milmed/article/183/5-6/e258/4840543.
Disabled American Veterans (DAV). n.d. Military Toxic Exposures.
https://www.dav.org/veterans/resources/military-toxic-
exposures/#:~:text=Currently%20there%20are%20six%20health,Radiation%20and
%20Toxic%20Embedded%20Fragments.
Doraiswamy, P. E. London, P. Varnum, B. Harvey, S. Saxena, S. Tottman, Sir P.
Campbell, A. Fernández Ibáñez, H. Manji, M. Abdul Aziz Sultan Al Olama, I-h.
Chou, H. Herrman, S. Jeong, T. Le, C. Montojo, B. Reve, K,. Rommelfanger, C.
Stix, N, Thakor. 2019. "Empowering 8 Billion Minds: Enabling Better Mental Health
for All via the Ethical Adoption of Technologies.' October 28. Accessed 17 2021,
November. https://nam.edu/empowering-8-billion-minds-enabling-better-mental-
health-for-all-via-the-ethical-adoption-of-technologies/.
Executive Order 13985 Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved
Communities Through the Federal Government. 2021. Federal Register. January
25. Accessed May 5, 2021.
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/01/25/2021-01753/advancing-
racial-equity-and-support-for-underserved-communities-through-the-federal-
government.
Executive Order 13999, Protecting Worker Health and Safety. 2021. The White House
Briefing Room. January 21. Accessed March 3, 2021.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/21/executive-order-protecting-worker-health-and-safety/
Executive Order 14008. Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad. 2021. Federal
Register. January 27. Accessed April 30, 2021.
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/02/01/2021-02177/tackling-the-
climate-crisis-at-home-and-abroad.
Executive Order 14058 Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery
to Rebuild Trust in Government. 2021. Federal Register. December 16. Accessed
January 7, 2022. https://public-inspection.federalregister.gov/2021-27380.pdf.
Federal Communications Commission. n.d. Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act - 29
U.S.C. § 794d. Accessed May 5, 2021.
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2011-title29/html/USCODE-2011-
tle29-chap16-subchapV-sec794d.htm.
Page 223 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Felix HC, Mays GP, Steward MK, Cottoms N, Olson M. 2011. "The Care Span: Medicaid
savings resulted when community health workers matched those with needs to
home and community care." Health Affairs 30 (7): 1366-1377.
Fulmer, Terry, et al. 2021. "Actualizing Better Health Care for Older Adults: Commentary
describes six vital directions to improve the care and quality of life for all older
Americans." Health Affairs 40 (2): 219-225.
Government Accountability Office. 2019. VA Health Care. U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE. https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-20-83.
Griffin. 2019. "Moral Injury: An Integrative Review." Special Issue on Moral Injury, 350-
362. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/jts.22362.
Health Services Research & Development. n.d. Advancing Value-Driven Care.
 https://www.seattledenvercoin.research.va.gov/research/value_driven_care.asp.
Herman. 2017. "Cost-effectiveness of Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction Versus
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy or Usual Care Among Adults With Chronic Low Back
Pain." SPINE p 1511-1520. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28742756/.
Herman. 2019. "The use of complementary and integrative health approaches for chronic
musculoskeletal pain in younger US Veterans: An economic evaluation." PLoS
ONE. https://storage.googleapis.com/plos-corpus-
/10.1371/journal.pone.0217831/1/pone.0217831.pdf?X-Goog-
Algorithm=GOOG4-RSA-SHA256&X-Goog-Credential=wombat-sa%40plos-
prod.iam.gserviceaccount.com%2F20210623%2Fauto%2Fstorage%2Fgoog4_req
uest&X-Goog-Date=20210.
n.d. Honoring the 30th Anniversary of the Gulf War.
ittps://www.datahub.va.gov/stories/s/ds6c-w7wj.
House Committee on Veterans Affairs. 2021 "Restoring Faith by Building Trust: VA's
First 100 Days." YouTube. March 24. Accessed June 17, 2021.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8zp6dwOVNY
Hunt S.C., & Hoge C.W. 2018. "Health Care for Military Veterans." In Harrison's Principles
of Internal Medicine, by & Hoge C.W. Hunt S.C. McGraw-Hill.
https:/laccessmedicine.mhmedical.com/Content.aspx?bookid=2129&sectionid=192
510174.
Institute of Medicine. 2008. Retooling for an Aging America: Building the Health Care
Workforce. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
doi:https://doi.org/10.17226/12089.
Irvin, C.V. et al. 2017. "Money Follows the Person 2015 Annual Evaluation Report.'
Mathematica Policy Research.
Kaye, H. S. 2012. "Gradual Rebalancing Of Medicaid Long-Term Services And Supports
Saves Money And Serves More People, Statistical Model Shows. Health Affairs
31 (6): 1195-1203.
Page 224 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Kaye, H. S., LaPlante, M. P., Harrington, C. 2009. "Do Noninstitutional Long-term Care
Servces Reduce Medicaid Spending?" Health Affairs 28 (1): 262-272.
Kime, Patricia. 2021. "The VA's Budget Has Quintupled in 20 Years. Veterans Groups
Want Billions More." Military Daily News. February. https://www.military.com/daily
news/2021/02/01/vas-budget-has-quintupled-20-years-veterans-groups-want-
billions-more.html.
- 2021. VA Gets Another Massive Funding Increase-Bidens First Budget. 06 01.
https://www.military.com/daily-news/2021/06/01/va-gets-another-massive-funding-
increase-bidens-first-budget.html.
Krebs. 2018. "Effect of Opioid vs Nonopioid Medications on Pain-Related Function in
Patients With Chronic Back Pain or Hip or Knee Osteoarthritis Pain: The SPACE
Randomized Clinical Trial." JAMA 872-882.
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2673971.
Landis, Austin. 2021. "More Doses Needed to Vaccinate Veterans, VA Secretary Says."
Spectrum News 1. March 4. Accessed March 22, 2021.
https://spectrumlocalnews.com/nys/central-ny/news/2021/03/04/more-supply-
needed-to-quickly-vaccinate-veterans--va-secretary-says.
Marek K. D., Stetzer F., Adams, S.J., Popejoy, L.L., Rantz, M. 2012. "Aging in Place
Versus Nursing Home Care: Comparison of Costs to Medicare and Medicaid.'
Research in Gerontology Nursing 5: 123-129.
McDonough, Denis. 2020. "My Pledge to our Nation's Veterans." Military Times.
December 22. Accessed January 18, 2021.
https://www.militarytimes.com/opinion/commentary/2020/12/22/my-pledge-to-our-
nations-veterans/.
- 2021. "Restoring Faith and Rebuilding Trust." House Committee on Veterans' Affairs.
March 25. Accessed August 31, 2021.
https://veterans.house.gov/events/hearings/restoring-faith-by-building-trust-vas-
first-100-days.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary. n.d. Marginalize. Accessed May 5, 2021.
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/marginalize.
Mobbs, M.C., George A. Bonanno. 2018. "Beyond War and PTSD: The crucial role of
transition stress in the lives of military Veterans. Clinical Psychology Review 59:
137-144. Accessed December 29, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2017.11.007.
Murray, Caitlin, Alena Tourtellotte, Debra Lipson, Andrea Wysocki. 2021. "Medicaid Long
Term Services and Supports Annual Expenditures Report: Federal Fiscal Years
2017 and 2018." Mathematica Policy Research.
National Center for Healthcare Advancement and Partnerships. n.d. Veteran Community
Partnerships. https://www.va.gov/healthpartnerships/vcp.asp.
Page 225 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics. n.d. "Special Reports." American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans: 2017.
https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/SpecialReports/AIAN.pdf.
- 2020. "U.S. Veterans Eligibility Trends and Statistics, 2017.'
https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/VA_Utilization_Profile_2017.pdf.
Newcomer, R. J., Ko, M., Kang, T., Harringtron, C., Hulett, D., Bindman, A. B. 2016.
"Health Care Expenditures After Initiating Long-term Services and Supports in the
Community Versus in a Nursing Facility.' Med Care 54 (3): 221-228.
NIDA. 2019. "Substance Use and Military Life Drug Facts." www.drugabuse.gov
tps://www.drugabuse.gov/download/4539/substance-use-military-life-
rugfacts.pdf?v=3c3fef9abe44dfc6f720af9c882ac8d9.
Norman, Maguen. n.d. PTSD: National Center for PTSD.
https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/treat/cooccurring/moral_injury.asp.
Office of Health Equity. n.d."Social_Determinants_Fact_Sheet_V2." Veterans Health
Administration.
https://www.va.gov/HEALTHEQUITY/docs/Social_Determinants_Fact_Sheet_V2-
0.pdf.
Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs. n.d. "America's Wars."
https://www.va.gov/opa/.
os://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/fs_americas_wars.pdf.
Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs TF. 2021. VA Establishes 120-day Task
Force on Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Access.
 https://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id=5657#:~:text=26%3A00%20
PM-
,VA%20establishes%20120%2Dday%20task%20force,inclusion%2C%20diversity
%2C%20equity%20and%20access&text=Conduct%20a%20whole%2Dof%2DVA
%20review%20of%20policies%2C%20programming,inc.
Office of Rural Health . n.d. Office of Rural Health Programs.
https://www.ruralhealth.va.gov/aboutus/programs.asp.
Olenick, Maria. 2015. "US Veterans and Their Unique Issues: Enhancing Health Care
Professional Awareness." Advances in Medical Education and Practice 635-639.
ittps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4671760/.
Rasmussen Reports. 2018. Current Events. July 30.
https://www.rasmussenreports.com/public_content/politics/current_events/afghanis
tan/do_voters_know_we_re_still_at_war_with_afghanistan.
Santos, dos. 2016. "Antidepressive, Anxiolytic and Antiaddictive Effects of Ayahuasca,
Psilocybin and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD): A Systematic Review of Clinical
Trials Published in the Last 25 Years." Therapeutic Advances in
Psychopharmacology * 193-213.
 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298876308_Antidepressive_anxiolytic_an
_antiaddictive_effects_of_ayahuasca_psilocybin_and_lysergic_acid_diethylamide
Page 226 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
LSD_a_systematic_review_of_clinical_trials_published_in_the_last_25_years/link
59e152fd458515393d.
Seal. 2017. "Association of Traumatic Brain Injury With Chronic Pain in Iraq and
Afghanistan Veterans: Effect of Comorbid Mental Health Conditions." Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Pages 1636-1645.
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0003999317302605?via%3
Dihub.
Shanahan. 2019. "Does Despair Really Kill? A Roadmap for an Evidence-Based Answer."
American Journal of Public Health 2019.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6506367/pdf/AJPH.2019.305016.pd
f.
n.d. Social Determinants of Health.
https://www.va.gov/HEALTHEQUITY/Social_Determinants_of_Health.asp.
Teeters. 2017. "Substance use Disorders in Military Veterans: Prevalence and Treatment
Challenges." Substance Abuse and Rehabilitation 69-77.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5587184/pdf/sar-8-069.pdf.
The Independent Budget. n.d. "The Independent Budget: Fiscal Years 2021 and 2022."
 http://www.independentbudget.org/pdf/FY22%20IB_Budget%20Book_2.14.20.pdf.
The White House. 2011. "Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-8. Department of Homeland
Security. March 30. Accessed November 17, 2021.
ttps://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/presidential-policy-directive-8-national-
preparedness.pdf.
Tinetti, Mary Dr. n.d. "What Is an Age-Friendly Health System?" Institute for Health Care
Improvement. Accessed June 25, 2021. http://www.ihi.org/Engage/Initiatives/Age-
Friendly-Health-Systems/Pages/default.aspx.
U.S. Congress. 2016. "S.524 - Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016."
https://www.congress.gov. July. https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-
congress/senate-bill/524/text
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2009. "Interagency Collaboration: Key Issues for
Congressional Oversight of National Security Strategies, Organizations, Workforce
and Information Sharing." Government Accountability Office. September.
Accessed January 6, 2022. https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-09-904sp.pdf.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. February 2020. "VA Health Care: Veteran's Use
of Long-Term Care is Increasing and VA Faces Challenges in Meeting the
Demand." doi:https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-20-284.pdf.
n.d. VA Caregiver Support. https://www.caregiver.va.gov/.
VA Health Care. n.d. Military Sexual Trauma.
https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/mentalhealth/msthome/index.asp.
- n.d. Trauma Informed Care. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/treat/care/index.asp.
Page 227 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
VA Homeless Programs Office. 2019. Point-in-Time (PIT) Count.
https://www.va.gov/HOMELESS/pit_count.asp.
VA Homeless Programs. n.d. Trauma-Informed t Care for Working with Homeless
Veterans. https://www.va.gov/homeless/nchav/docs/Trauma-Informed-Care-Fact-
Sheet.pdf.
VA Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention. September 2018. VA National Suicide
Data Report. n/a: VA. https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/data-
sheets/OMHSP_National_Suicide_Data_Report_2005-2016_508.pdf.
VA Office of Rural Health. n.d. "Office of Rural Health." https://www.ruralhealth.va.gov/
https://www.ruralhealth.va.gov/docs/ORH_Thrive2018_FINAL_508.pdf.
Veterans Administration. 2021. https://www.va.gov/.0
Ittps://www.va.gov/opa/speeches/2021/05_18_2021.asp.
- . 2020. Office of Budget. February. https://www.va.gov/budget/products.asp.
- n.d. Veteran Rapid Retraining Assistance Program (VRRAP).
https://www.va.gov/education/other-va-education-benefits/veteran-rapid-retraining-
assistance/.
Veterans Benefit Administration. n.d. VAntage Point.
https://blogs.va.gov/VAntage/87708/american-rescue-plan-arp/.
Veterans Benefits Administration. n.d. Lesbian, Gay Bisexual & Transgender (LGBT)
Service Members and Veterans. https://www.benefits.va.gov/persona/lgbt.asp.
- n.d. Minority Veterans Program. https://www.benefits.va.gov/PERSONA/veteran-
minority.asp.
- 2018. "The Military to Civilian Transition 2018: A Review of Historical, Current and
Future Trends." Veterans Benefits Administration. Accessed December 29, 2021.
https://benefits.va.gov/TRANSITION/docs/mct-report-2018.pdf.
- n.d. "The Military to Civilian Transition 2018: A Review of Historical, Current and
Future Trends." Transition and Economic Development. Accessed June 17, 2021.
https://benefits.va.gov/TRANSITION/docs/mct-report-2018.pdf
- n.d. Women Veterans. https://www.benefits.va.gov/PERSONA/veteran-women.asp.
Veterans Health Administration. n.d. Management of Opioid Therapy (OT) for Chronic
Pain. https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/pain/cot/.
- n.d. "Office of Health Equity.'
https://www.va.gov/HEALTHEQUITY/docs/Social_Determinants_Fact_Sheet_V2-
0.pdf.
VHA Geriatrics and Extended Care. n.d. VA Age-Friendly Health Systems Initiative.
  https://www.va.gov/geriatrics/pages/VA_Age_Friendly_Health_Systems_Initiative.a
sp.
2020. What is Allied Health. Accessed March 3, 2021. https://www.asahp.org/what-is.
Page 228 of 235
VA
U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Zaccheus. 2020. "Drug Overdose and Suicide Among Veteran Enrollees in the VHA:
Comparison Among Local, Regional and National Data." FEDERAL
PRACTITIONER 420-425.
tps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7535957/pdf/fp-37-9-420.pdf.
Zogas. 2017. "Watson Institute of International and Public Affairs."
https://watson.brown.edu/.
 https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2017/Zogas_Veterans
%27%20Transitions_CoW_2.1.17.pdf.
Page 229 of 235
